---
title: "Revitalization through Innovation: Lasell College Entrepreneurs Travel to Detroit"
layout: post
date: 2016-04-26
tag:
- Opportunity
- Detroit
- Entrepreneur
blog: true
star: true
---
![opportunity_detroit](/assets/images/OD/OD_Logo-compressor.png)




# REVITALIZATION THROUGH INNOVATION: Students from Lasell College (Newton MA) travel to Detroit, and learn from entrepreneurs rebuilding motor city

**Harris Demos, [Isaiah King](http://linkedin.com/in/manifestlife), Alexa Katsigianis(BUSS337 Managing the Growing Company)**

As our small group of [Lasell College](http://lasell.edu) students took our
first few steps through the Detroit Metro Airport, our opinions immediately
began to shift our perceived image of the “broken city” of Michigan. Our vision
based on previous hearsay. However, Lasell College is aware that students are
more successful when they can connect their learning experiences from the
classroom into the real world. The connected learning philosophy and application
has opened our minds to exploring opportunity of the unknown, which Detroit
proved to be the best “unknown” any of us could have pictured.

![opportunity_detroit](/assets/images/OD/OD_Dog-compressor.png)
![](/assets/images/OD/OD_Piano-compressor.png)

The streets showed us vivacious colors and innovative ideas that many other
United States cities do not. Detroit’s vision is to transform Downtown into an
urban neighborhood with a unique point of view, which is exactly what is being
done.

Through these alterations, Detroit will continue to attract a young demographic:
one that is willing to jump at the first site of opportunity. These simple yet
brilliant creations proved to us, and will prove to the incoming urban
population, that government officials have the desire to implement change. This
refreshing outlook with open-mindedness has not always been persistent in the
past. However, higher interest and connections from Detroit residents are
beginning to transform and re-populate the downtown. This will continue to bring
fresh business ideas into the thriving city of Detroit.

**The Problem**

Detroit is one of America’s greatest cities and is known for its historical
development and success within the early stages of the automotive industry. Ford
Motor Company was founded in 1903 by an entrepreneur named Henry Ford. Even
though Ford did not create the first automobile, he did develop and manufacture
the first automobile that many middle class Americans could afford. The Dodge
brothers, Walter Chrysler, and other automotive pioneers paved a road that
allowed Detroit to become the global automotive capital. In the year 1950, there
were almost 300,000 manufacturing jobs but that number dwindled down to less
than 27,000 in 2013.

In 1960 Detroit had the highest income per person in each household but in 2013,
the city ranked 35^th^ out of 50 states. From 1960 to 2013, the city slowly lost
over fifty percent of its population and filed for Section 9 bankruptcy. Detroit
went from the fourth biggest city in the United States down to the 18^th^. It is
apparent that Detroit was once a place flourishing with opportunity that allowed
its residents to clearly vision and achieve the “American Dream”[^1]. Currently
opportunities do exist, possibly even more than before, but these opportunities
were manifested from the rundown ecosystem Detroit has rebirthed into.

To this day, Detroit is the largest city to ever go bankrupt. This economic
tragedy was precisely four times larger than Jefferson County, Alabama's \$4
billion filing in 2011. The reason for Detroit’s bankruptcy mostly involves the
word "fiscal", which refers to economics from the perspective of the system to
which they belong -- with the central factors including taxes and spending. More
specific reasoning for the cause comes from the widespread corruption within
Detroit municipalities which resulted in a billion-dollar “borrowing binge”.
Detroit was caught up in borrowing unreasonable amounts of money for cash-flow
reasons but failed to replace the cost of these investments. The culture of the
fiscal economy in Detroit made a shift in the late 20^th^ century. This involved
spending future money for purchases that were needed presently. The city was
able to function temporarily but filed for bankruptcy in 2013 with an
accumulated amount of \$20 billion.

Detroit has its obstacles to overcome the economic downfall. The city developed
a reputation of lacking fiscal responsibility. One of the most obvious outcomes
of the bankruptcy was unemployment. The economic structure of the city was built
upon large automobile companies. When downtown went bankrupt, people were
dislocated from their jobs and homes due to the large business owners'
outsourcing human capital. The residents flocked the city due to the economic
downturn beginning in 1947.

Between 1947 and 1978 there were 1.36 million jobs lost within the automotive
industry in the United States due to the importation of Japanese manufacturing.
The city population dropped forty percent from 1970 to 2006, and as of 2013 the
total population was less than 700,000 people. These large corporations did not
utilize the opportunities for hiring within the community or even the country,
which could have prevented the bankruptcy all together. Instead, Detroit
residents had poorer economic standings due to the over-production of cars[^2].

People were not in the financial position to make major investments such as
buying a new car every few years, and as a result the demand for cars was
significantly lower than their supply. Once the big businesses in a given area
went bankrupt, such as General Motors and other large automobile companies in
Detroit, they were no longer able to pay taxes and therefore provide for public
services. The lack of input and output of money into the economy at the time of
bankruptcy negatively impacted other local businesses, such as schools and
public transportation.

This caused a large amount of blight throughout the city. As of 2013, nearly one
in four buildings in Detroit are abandoned or on the verge of becoming owned by
the state in order to be demolished[^3]. This lack of occupancy makes it
difficult for Detroit to attract young professionals into the city. Buildings
being destroyed and rebuilt will take time. Therefore it is imperative that
Detroit turns these buildings into something that can be used instantly.

Considering the economic strain on our national fiscal system, it is not
uncommon for bankruptcy to negatively impact a wide range of people, including
individuals, communities, and businesses of all sizes, both local and corporate.
All in all, the fiscal policies of Detroit were ineffective and there were
numerous reasons that lead to its economic failure. The Downtown Detroit Project
is taking steps to reduce and possibly eliminate these threats of urban decay.

**Building an Entrepreneurial Ecosystem**

Through these economic struggles, Detroit has managed to begin piecing together
the puzzle the recession left. As the pieces fell into place, something
unimaginable began to appear: an entrepreneurial ecosystem. A world of
businesses formed, both start-up and matured, run by the people who own or wish
to be part of these businesses began to emerge. Unfortunately as we all know, it
is not always easy to provide capital or enough creative ideas to innovate the
mangled city, but that did not stop a man that embodies entrepreneurial spirit;
Daniel Gilbert.

![Dan_Gilbert](/assets/images/OD/OD_Dan_Gilbert-compressor.png)

Known as the savior of
Detroit,[Gilbert](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dan_Gilbert_(businessman) has
gone above and beyond with aiding the city in its time of need. Gilbert, a
Detroit Native, dedicated large amounts of his time, efforts, and capital to
help his city rise after seeing it fall. A major contributing factor in
Gilbert’s investments in the city is his love for business. At a young age
Gilbert was captivated by business and knew that it was the life for him.

This life does not come easy, and Gilbert knew an opportunity would not just
fall into his lap. Gilbert worked hard and now currently serves as the founder
and chairman of both Quicken Loans and Rock Ventures. Quicken Loans is the
nation’s second largest mortgage lender and Rock Ventures has over 110
partnering companies. These major companies began to see the light of day in
2010 when Dan Gilbert initiated his big move to the city of Detroit. Gilbert
managed to move 1,200 team members of Quicken Loans to Michigan in a record
amount of time. Once these team members flooded the city, the expansion of his
empire throughout downtown Detroit began.

From investing roughly \$1.3 billion in real estate, Gilbert owned and renovated
nearly 60 properties in the inner city limits. This gave his new Detroit team a
professional “playground” to work with. This playground consists of offices
where space is utilized in a creative way and team members can come together,
regardless of position in the company, and collaborate about innovative
ideas[^4].

Although a playground sounds fun and exciting, creating it to be a positive work
environment proved to be a challenge. Coming to a city of despair can be
overwhelming for many non-residents. For Gilbert, on the other hand, this is an
obstacle that can be overcome. If Governor Rick Snyder can confidently state Dan
Gilbert “has a track record as a successful entrepreneur and innovator” due to
the amount of progress that has already been made[^5]. With the vision to
synthesize a more stimulating city, the goal was to attract young and
well-educated entrepreneurs. A cheap yet inspiring city that has an edgy and
original tone is the perfect environment for these newcomers.

The reputation of the city, however, makes it difficult for newcomers to
consider Detroit as a livable work environment. The image of the city is crucial
to have an inviting feel. Blight is a major contributing factor as to why
foreigners do not feel safe. Blight is defined as abandoned and rundown
buildings. Detroit created a special task force to reconstruct the city. As each
condemned and abandoned building gets updated, it’s one step closer to
transforming Detroit into an entrepreneurial utopia[^6].

Having this utopia created was no accident. The Quicken Loans office showcases a
full model scaled replica of the city. Each building or property is lit up as
Gilbert purchase it. Detroit went from having 48 of the city’s largest office
spaces unoccupied to having only 17 remaining unused. Also with employment
boosting from 78,000-85,000 in only 4 years, there is much to be done to prepare
the city for the number of residents that will follow those who have already
joined this business renaissance movement[^7].

Being a Detroit resident is not about just living in the city anymore, it is
about being part of the entrepreneurial experience and lifestyle. Needing
approximately \$45,000 annually to live comfortably in Detroit, the average cost
of living is far lower than other major American cities[^8]. New college
graduates will come for the low cost of living but stay for the experiences.
From the Cavaliers inspired basketball court within the Quicken Loans
headquarters to the colorful office spaces, one will feel astonished yet
instantly comfortable with the work environment and culture. Each team member
that is added becomes a link in the chain, which makes the city stronger. The
opportunities in Detroit are endless and due to the efforts Gilbert and many
other for-profit and non-profit companies, the most compelling being Opportunity
Detroit.

**Background**

Opportunity Detroit is a non-profit organization that promotes the awareness of
Detroit’s story. It shows potential Detroit customers or businesses what the
city has experienced in the past and how these lessons have impacted their
future growth. The umbrella company under Rock Venture also publicizes the
government officials and investors’ plan for downtown. Placing extreme
importance on resident feedback, Opportunity Detroit’s vision is to provide
Detroit residents with a city that is innovative and useful that agrees with
their everyday lifestyle.

**Implementation**

The plan to revitalize the city has been portioned into six major sections of
the city:

![OD_Map](/assets/images/OD/OD_Map-compressor.png)

These six sections each have specific implementation plans in order to achieve
the final goal for Detroit, centralized around one main vision; the
transformation of Woodward Ave. into a “promenade” street. The promenade feel
(“to walk” translated from French), simply means Detroit officials want to
provide the citizens with a relaxing environment that will entertain them as
they walk the streets.

The biggest factor Opportunity Detroit is considering when marketing to their
target is the modification of the streets. The addition of sidewalk activation
crossing signals and the M1-rail system will promote a highly-valued pedestrian
environment. Encouraging Detroit citizens to walk in the city will turn them
into potential customers of the young businesses that are currently thriving.
Integrating food and beverage, entertainment, and retail shopping needs into the
everyday lives of the citizens will give them a connection to the city as well.
As the citizens continue connecting to the “Detroit pride” that not only
radiates through the current residents, but through the promotion efforts of
Opportunity Detroit, more people will begin to leave the outskirts and flock
into the bustling city[^9].

This shift in lifestyle coincides with Opportunity Detroit’s most important
factor to consider: recognize potential resident locations, build them to
acceptable living conditions and fill them with residents. Capitalizing on the
real estate market during this time is essential for Detroit to become
profitable. As the city begins to repopulate with Michigan residents, more
people will come from other parts of the country to offer their ideas and
continue to bring opportunity.

Change can often be tricky to implement if not done correctly. However
officials’ stress on “placemaking” ensures customer satisfaction. Essentially,
placemaking gives citizens the opportunity to give feedback to officials in
order to ensure that all of the modifications that are being achieved are
accepted by the public. Giving residents the ability to comment during the
process will ensure that spaces are provided to them that are easily accessible,
engaging, comfortable and welcoming.

Through the previously successful implementations already in place, Detroit has
every opportunity to succeed. It has history; Detroit is the largest and most
recent city to declare bankruptcy in the United States to date. However, they
have learned valuable lessons from their failures which gave them the capability
to better execute their future vision for Detroit.

Opportunity Detroit’s promotion is a key factor in order for investors and
official’s efforts to be seen. As the education of what is happening now in
Detroit increases, people will begin to flock to this once “broken” city and
transform it into its true potential: a unique and incredible opportunity.

<!-- Works Cited

A Better Solution for Detroit's Blight. (n.d.). Retrieved November 12,
2014, from

http://www.thefiscaltimes.com/Articles/2014/05/30/Better-Solution-Detroit-s-Blight

About Us. (n.d.). Retrieved November 12, 2014, from
http://opportunitydetroit.com/about-us/

Auto industry decline, racial tension at the root of Detroit's collapse.
(n.d.). Retrieved November

12, 2014, from

http://www.pennlive.com/midstate/index.ssf/201

"Choose Thinking: A Blog by Dan Gilbert." *About Dan Gilbert*. N.p.,
n.d. Web. 25 Nov. 2014.

"Dan Gilbert." *Chairman and Founder, Quicken Loans Inc. • Majority
Owner, Cleveland *

*Cavaliers*. N.p., n.d. Web. 25 Nov. 2014.

Gilbert, D. (2014, November 7). Choose Thinking: A Blog by Dan Gilbert.
Retrieved November

12, 2014,

from http://choosethinking.com/

"Gilbertville: A Billionaire's Drive To Rebuild The Motor City."
*Forbes*. Forbes Magazine, n.d.

Web. 25 Nov. 2014.

United States Census Bureau. (n.d.). Retrieved November 12, 2014, from

http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/26/2622000.html -->

REVITALIZATION THROUGH INNOVATION: LASELL STUDENTS TRAVEL TO DETROIT,
LEARN FROM ENTREPRENEURS REBUILDING MOTOR CITY

[^1]: Auto industry decline, racial tension at the root of Detroit's
    collapse. (n.d.). Retrieved November 12, 2014, from

    http://www.pennlive.com/midstate/index.ssf/201

[^2]: United States Census Bureau. (n.d.). Retrieved November 12, 2014,
    from http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/26/2622000.html

[^3]: A Better Solution for Detroit's Blight. (n.d.). Retrieved November
    12, 2014, from

    http://www.thefiscaltimes.com/Articles/2014/05/30/Better-Solution-Detroit-s-Blight

[^4]: "Choose Thinking: A Blog by Dan Gilbert." *About Dan Gilbert*.
    N.p., n.d. Web. 25 Nov. 2014.

[^5]: "Dan Gilbert." *Chairman and Founder, Quicken Loans Inc. •
    Majority Owner, Cleveland Cavaliers*. N.p., n.d. Web. 25 Nov. 2014.

[^6]: "Gilbertville: A Billionaire's Drive To Rebuild The Motor City."
    *Forbes*. Forbes Magazine, n.d. Web. 25 Nov. 2014.

[^7]: Sorge, Marge. *Detroit Facts Economic Development Final 8-15-13*
    (n.d.): n. pag. Web.

[^8]: "Cost of Living Comparison:Detroit, Michigan - Boston,
    Massachusetts." *Cost of Living Comparison: Compare Detroit,
    Michigan to Boston, Massachusetts*. N.p., n.d. Web. 09 Dec. 2014.

[^9]: About Us. (n.d.). Retrieved November 12, 2014, from
    http://opportunitydetroit.com/about-us/
