---
title: "Krispy Kreme"
layout: post
date: 2016-04-27
tag:
- Krispy Kreme
- Case Study
blog: true
star: true
---

Krispy Kreme - Case Study

Robyn Crean, Jason DiCarlo, Amy Granville, Isaiah King

Lasell College

***Company Background***

Krispy Kreme Doughnuts was created when Vernon Rudolph discovered an old
hand-written doughnut recipe that his uncle, a Kentucky farmer, had
purchased in 1933. Today, Krispy Kreme Doughnuts, Inc. is an iconic
international [doughnut](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doughnut) and
[coffeehouse
chain](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_coffeehouse_chains) using
the same secret recipe that Rudolph’s uncle purchased in New Orleans,
currently locked up in a safe in Winston-Salem.[^1] In the beginning,
Krispy Kreme was solely a wholesale bakery baking doughnuts for local
grocery stores. However, the local residents couldn’t get enough of the
intoxicating aroma from the factory leading Rudolph to the decision of
selling directly to the community. Rudolph ordered, “Cut a hole in the
factory wall and sell ’em out on to the street.”[^2]

By the 1950’s Krispy Kreme became a regional chain with thirty shops
located throughout the Southeast. After Rudolph’s death in 1973, Krispy
Kreme was sold to Beatrice Foods who ultimately led the company
downhill. The relationship between Beatrice Foods and Krispy Kreme has
been described as “a bad marriage” by former CEO, Scott Livengood.
Livengood also stated, “Beatrice didn’t care so much if the stores made
money, as long as we sold doughnuts to supermarkets. She didn’t want to
invest in stores or expand the company.”[^3]

In 1982 a group of twenty-two franchises joined together and purchased
Krispy Kreme in a leveraged buyout. The company now in the hands of
individuals who cared about the brand implemented a new innovative
marketing effort to re-vamp the brand. The concept of the “Doughnut
Theater” was then born. This idea allowed customers to watch the entire
doughnut making process right in the store. Other efforts to help entice
business include “Hot Doughnut Now” signs, which were placed in every
retail branch. These signs were lit to notify consumers whenever fresh
doughnuts were finished baking. Customers could then walk in and receive
a free glazed doughnut.[^4]

Soon after, Krispy Kreme was experiencing rapid expansion. By the end of
1999, Krispy Kreme had 144 shops in 27 states and revenues climbing to
\$220 million. In April 2000, Krispy Kreme became a publicly traded
company.[^5] In December of the following year, Krispy Kreme opened a
store in Toronto, Canada; one of 49 stores added that year. Due to
exponential growth rates in May 2004, many sales became flat leading
Krispy Kreme to experience their first unprofitable quarter. With this
negative outcome and other issues within the company, Krispy Kreme’s
long-time CEO Scott Livengood stepped down and was replaced by Stephen
Copper. Hoping that he could turn things around, Cooper began the
recovery process. However, this proved to be too much for him to handle
because shortly after he handed the reins over to Daryl Brewster.
Brewster’s turnaround strategy called for Krispy Kreme to cut costs at a
sustainable level to prevent bankruptcy as well as adapting to the
health-conscious consumer and expanding internationally. Krispy Kreme
continued to struggle, even with Brewster’s strategy in place. Soon
after, James Morgan took over the business. Under Morgan’s leadership
the company had its first consecutive profitable years in 2010-2011
since the firm reached its peak in 2004.

In 2012 Krispy Kreme celebrated its 75^th^ anniversary of selling “Melt
in Your Mouth Joy” doughnuts. On June 1, 2014 Tony Thompson was
appointed President and CEO of Krispy Kreme.[^6] Most recently, Krispy
Kreme opened its 1,000^th^ store in Kansas City. Krispy Kreme has
implemented many innovative ideas in efforts to keep the company
relevant. The company has also introduced new healthier menu items such
as oatmeal, yogurt, and juice at select locations. The company also
offers a smaller, “bit sized” doughnut as well as a whole wheat doughnut
option as healthier alternatives. They have also introduced a variety of
coffee, crullers, seasonal/holiday-inspired doughnuts, ice cream and
doughnut sundaes, and a line of “chillers” which are Krispy Kreme’s
version of a smoothie and doughnut milk shakes. Although there are
numerous flavors of doughnuts, mini doughnuts, and doughnut holes, the
Original Glazed has always been the most popular product sold by the
company.

By experimenting with different markets to delve into, the company has
managed to stay relevant and create new revenue streams. Krispy Kreme
also created a prominent presence abroad which has proven to be very
important to the company. Though the company has had its ups and downs,
Krispy Kreme will always maintain a role as one of the leading doughnut
brands in the world.

***General Environmental Analysis***

*Political Trends*

Krispy Kreme must adhere to many different codes including: Code of
Business Conduct and Ethics, Code of Ethics for Chief Executive and
Senior Financial Officers, Chief Executive Officer Succession Policy,
Corporate Governance Guidelines, Policy and Procedure with Respect to
Related Person Transactions.

First, Code of Business Conduct and Ethics is a code of conduct which is
a set of organizational rules regarding values, beliefs, ethics, and
matters of legal compliance. Organizational members are responsible for
adhering to the code of conduct and will be held accountable for failure
to do so.[^7] Codes of conduct prohibit behavior and inform employees of
what is expected of them. Also outlined in the code are penalties for
failure to comply. A few common topics in Business Codes that arise are:
Conflicts of interest, Confidential information, Employment
discrimination, Use of the organization’s property, Financial reporting
and accounting, Health and safety issues, Political contributions and
campaigning in the office, and Legal compliance issues relevant to the
organization.

The Code of Ethics for Chief Executive and Senior Financial Officers is
similar to the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics, however the Chief
Executive Officer and senior financial officers are subjected to
additional policies. One rule states, The CEO and each senior financial
officer shall promptly bring to the attention of the General Counsel any
information he or she may have concerning alleged evidence of a material
violation of the securities or other laws, rules or regulations
applicable to the Company and the operation of its business, by the
Company or any agent thereof, or of a material violation of the Code of
Business Ethics or of these additional procedures.[^8]

Next is the Chief Executive Officer Succession Policy. This policy is a
guideline to a change in executive leadership in a company. Krispy Kreme
has created a plan to insure stability and accountability of the company
in preparation for a planned or unplanned change in leadership.

The Corporate Governance Guidelines provide a framework for the
governance of Krispy Kreme. Corporate governance involves balancing the
interests of shareholders, management, customers, suppliers, financiers,
government and the community. Not only does it provide a framework for
attaining objectives but it also covers every area of management.[^9]

Krispy Kreme has quite a few government regulations to stay compliant
to, including local regulation. Their stores are subject to licensing
through government authorities such as health, sanitation, safety, and
fire agencies. In order to meet these regulations, they must respect
zoning, land use, and environmental factors. Another regulation that
must be met is the food product regulation. Krispy Kreme must meet all
federal state and governmental rules. “For example, the ingredient list,
product weight and other aspects of our product labels are subject to
state and federal regulation for accuracy and content. Most states
periodically check products for compliance. The use of various product
ingredients and packaging materials is regulated by the United States
Department of Agriculture and the Federal Food and Drug Administration.”

There are few other political factors that affect the success of Krispy
Kreme. One political interference would be the minimum wage and
employment law changes. Most of the Krispy Kreme employees and staff are
usually individuals with little experience or education. Although the
company does take time to train these individuals, they are usually paid
minimum wage. Therefore, Krispy Kreme is affected by the minimum wage
increases.[^10]

More political factors that affect the company are the government
efforts to reduce the risks of obesity. Although it is highly doubtful
that the government will enforce laws banning high fat and unhealthy
food options, the possibility still exists.[^11]

*Economic Trends*

Due to the rise and fall of the economy, consumer spending has
tightened. Where customers are more critical about where they spend
their money, Krispy Kreme has been affected by selling a product that is
considered to be a non-essential food item. Therefore, the company may
feel a pressure in sales. Due to limited customer spending, the fight
for sales against competitors has intensified.[^12]

Other economical factors affecting the business would be the rise of
wheat and soybean oil prices. These are key ingredients in Krispy Kreme
doughnuts which have reached record high prices.[^13] Also, Krispy Kreme
is taking a big hit from return rates from the company’s wholesale
partners whose rate are higher than normal. One of the biggest issues
affecting the economic achievement of Krispy Kreme is their overuse of
discounted promotions. Although these promotions entice numerous
consumers to purchase doughnuts or other products, the cut in costs from
the many promotions are actually hindering the success of the business.

Although there are a few negative economic factors, there are some
positive. Krispy Kreme is able to purchase key supplies at volume
discount prices that competitors may not be receiving. Krispy Kreme is
very selective in choosing suppliers and requires potential suppliers to
meet certain standards in regards to quality and reliability. The
economy overall is not a prominent factor determining Krispy Kreme’s
success because they are not affected by the gross domestic product
indicators or unemployment numbers unlike most companies.[^14]

*Sociological Trends*

A huge sociological factor affects the success of Krispy Kreme would be
the awareness and concern about health and ingredients in food. Where
consumers are becoming more aware and cautious about what they are
putting in their bodies, they have become more critical about where they
spend their money to purchase food items. Due to outbursts across the
world of boycotting trans fats and other ingredients, Krispy Kreme has
responded by creating a whole wheat doughnut option that removes trans
fats from their products. Krispy Kreme has also eliminated the use of
artificial colors in their doughnuts. Also, they protect earth
environment with CO2 free production methods.

However, although the concept of obtaining a healthier lifestyle has
become a rising trend, Krispy Kreme should remain afloat. Going out to
eat is a social habit exercised by most individuals which most likely
will not change.[^15] Therefore, companies like Krispy Kreme can thrive,
but they will need to adjust their food options to stay competitive.

Krispy Kreme also gives back by participating in various social
contribution activities. Many of their stores sponsor children suffering
from hunger through the “Coin Collection for Love” event. Our commitment
to corporate social responsibility is also evident\
in our sponsorship for various charity events including disabled support
events, underprivileged children, neighbor support, etc.[^16]

*Technological Trends*

In order to stay ahead of the competition, brands must embrace new
technology, however, in the food industry, technology has little
influence over the purchase and preparation of food. Newer technology
can be used to enhance efficiency, production, and distribution.
Although ecommerce is on the rise, this technology does not greatly
impact the food industry. [^17]

Krispy Kreme has created an app in order to keep up with the millennial
demographic. Krispy Kreme’s Hot Light is a useful app that alerts its
followers when doughnuts are “hot off the line.” Users also have the
option of setting their preferred locations as well as offered
directions to others. Also to entice customers, Krispy Kreme has created
“My Krispy Kreme Treats” customer loyalty app. This app which can be
downloaded on both iOS and Android smartphones allows customers to earn
rewards point which are redeemable for free products at any of their
locations.[^18]

Other technological advancements that Krispy Kreme has begun to
incorporate are paperless ordering, predictive modeling software, and
hand held computers for their delivery drivers.

*Demographic Trends*

Krispy Kreme competes in both the restaurant industry and retail. In the
restaurant industry; which includes fast food, fast-casual, and full
service segments, Krispy Kreme provides a universal product and global
brand marketed to everyone, everywhere of all ages and incomes. Consumer
demographics are in line with the general population. The food service
industry is often affected by the preferences and perception of
consumer. Changes in preferences are a risk for Krispy Kreme, lessening
the demand for doughnuts, which reduce sales. Krispy Kreme also sells
doughnuts to supermarkets, gas stations, and retailers such as Wal-Mart
for resale.

***Industry Analysis***

<span id="OLE_LINK1" class="anchor"><span id="OLE_LINK2"
class="anchor"></span></span> Krispy Kreme competes within two major
industries and they are identified as the “Quick Service Restaurant” and
the “Baked Good Production” segments. QSR represents the largest segment
within the restaurant industry and is known for steady growth over long
periods of time. The Baked Good Production industry is recognized by
Krispy Kreme at the wholesale level and doesn’t require as many
resources as QSR.

Both of these markets are presently experiencing slow growth and overall
change because many channels are saturated and also because product
differentiation is hard to implement within the donut industry. Although
change and innovation do not occur, it still remains to be a very
appealing billion-dollar industry. Amongst Krispy Kreme, there are many
entities that also compete within the donut industry including, Dunkin
Donuts, Tim Horton’s, Shipley’s Do-Nuts, and other small sized bakeries.

Organizations within this environment share many structural
similarities. These similarities ultimately contribute toward the
overall attractiveness of the donut industry. In this particular
environment the common themes regarding structure were high fixed costs,
low switching costs for customers, relatively low product
differentiation, as well as the maximization of profits through royalty
payments.

Due to low product differentiation and the high concentration of
competitive rivals, these industries are openly known to be extremely
competitive. For example, Dunkin Donuts operates 14 times the amount of
retail locations Krispy Kreme has, although they still fall behind them
financially. Dunkin Donuts is Krispy Kreme’s closest competitor in
sales, product offering, and worldwide presence. This is the result of
Krispy Kreme outpacing Dunkin Donut in the area of important industry
metrics. Profit margins, return on assets, return on equity, and equity
to debt stand as the metrics dictating this particular industries
attractiveness. Additionally, this industry has very low customer
switching costs, which negatively affect customer loyalty.

The threat of new donut powerhouse entrants at the national level is
very low. First off, it takes a significant amount of capital to
establish a network of stores. According to the Business Journal, it
takes roughly a half of a million dollars to become a Krispy Kreme
franchisee.
(http://www.bizjournals.com/triad/blog/2013/01/how-much-would-it-cost-to-open-a.html)
Competing alongside the QSR’s largest firms makes it virtually
impossible to capture economies of scale. In order to compete on a
national scale, the right amount of brand equity must be established.
Brand equity is build through many investments made in time, as well as
advertisement dollars. Even though there isn’t much Krispy Kreme has to
worry about when it comes to potentially large corporations becoming a
new competitor, there is some vulnerability at the local level.
Mom-and-pop shops automatically pose as a legitimate threat toward
Krispy Kreme because the capital requirements for an individual firm are
not high.

Suppliers have very little, if any, bargaining power mainly because most
businesses in this industry had a vertically intergraded business model.
Firms who choose to exercise this tactic gained access to a wide
availability of necessary raw materials.
(http://www.economist.com/node/13396061) It is also highly unlikely that
suppliers in the donut industry will enter the same business as its
clients. Companies such as Krispy Kreme have been known for locking in
contracts with their suppliers, further lessening the bargaining power
held by the suppliers. The low switching cost between vendors also is a
factor that plays against the suppliers as well. In fact, the only
buyers with the power to shake things up are firms in the wholesale
sales channel.

Due to its branding, customer-experience, secret recipes, and curiosity,
Krispy Kreme has positioned itself as the best differentiated brand in
the donut industry. Their belief of fluffily donuts over cake-textured
donuts is what largely separates Krispy Kreme and makes them stand out
in a well-received manner. By differentiating it’s main product as a
“premium donut” earned them a competitive edge and solidified Krispy
Kreme’s name within the industry.
(http://smallbusiness.chron.com/examples-differentiation-fast-food-69833.html)
Competitors of this industry attempt to expand revenues through coffee
sales, although the donut holds as absolute within the natural
performing environment. Due to the excellent efforts of differentiation,
the threat of substitution is low for Krispy Kreme unless donuts
completely disappear no matter how conscious consumers become. The
transition into conscious consumerism could unseeingly help sustain the
overall donut industry through healing overindulgence. As consumers
become increasingly aware, the chances of finding other useful or
therapeutic purpose for consuming donuts increase. For example, a
conscientious Krispy Kreme consumer of the future may determine that
they may want a fresh glazed donut not because they’re hungry, but
because they want to heighten their mood after a series of unfortunate
events. There are cases like this that occur highly often. Although the
desires of overindulgence are still present, this is due to the fact
that everyone in society has yet to evolve into a conscientious
consumer.

The intensity of rivalry among competitors Krispy Kreme faces is
moderate to high. Krispy Kreme has for a while, been outperforming all
of its competitors by a long shot. Both industries Krispy Kreme operates
in have highly concentrated amounts of competitive rivals, although many
of these channels are overly saturated. However, Krispy Kreme’s closest
competitor, Dunkin Donuts is in debt so deep that it is forced to
compete until the company goes black or an acceptable loss is set forth.

Through the analysis of The QSR and Baked Goods Production in which
Krispy Kreme competes, has exemplified that these are two highly
attractive and profitable industries. Through the extensive qualitative
and quantitative research of the environment in which Krispy Kreme
performs, high entry barriers, weak bargaining power from both seller
and buyer, along with weak product substitutions and moderate rivalry
among competitors were all identifiable.

***Internal Analysis***

-   In 1995, Krispy Kreme moved into a new corporate headquarters,
    reshuffled its management team, and prepared to expand nationwide.

-   To leverage the planned growth, the company relied on franchising
    instead of opening company owned stores

-   This allowed Krispy Kreme to receive a steady income flow from
    royalty fees, expand its customer base for mix and equipment via
    franchises, and inflate its brand recognition.

-   By the end of 1999, the company’s portfolio included 144 shops in 27
    states, and revenues had climbed to \$220 million—up 40% from just
    two years earlier

-   Krispy Kreme made its IPO in April 2000 with a split-adjusted price
    of \$9

-   By the close of 2003, the stock was selling at a price just a bit
    over \$49 per share

-   The company had expanded by 433 stores, had reached \$700 million in
    revenues, and had earned \$88 million in operating profit

-   As it turned out, the rapid expansion of the previous five years had
    not been carefully or effectively planned

-   As new franchises saturated the market and the novelty value of the
    firm’s products faded, it became obvious that the early success of
    many stores was sustainable

-   Many of the once-profitable stores began to flounder and, in May
    2004, Krispy Kreme experienced its first unprofitable quarter as a
    public company

-   Krispy Kreme implemented a new turnaround strategy that called for
    cutting costs to a sustainable level as a path to prevent the firm’s
    bankruptcy

-   Closed over 240 stores as the company retrenched to its stronghold
    in the Southeast

-   In 2012, 66% of retail stores were located outside the United
    States, with estimates of having 900 stores internationally by the
    end of 2017

-   Stock price bottomed out at less than \$4 a share in January 2008

-   Revenue eventually increased at the end of 2012, Krispy Kreme looked
    to open as many as 100 new stores domestic and internationally

-   Krispy Kreme earns the majority of revenue through the sale of
    doughnuts

-   Doughnut sales comprise over 88% of all retail sales while the
    remainder comes from selling beverage and complementary items

-   Maintenance of consistent gross profit margins and modest revenue
    growth of 4.5 and 11.4% in 2009 and 2010, respectively, have allowed
    Krispy Kreme to contribute to its bottom line and return to
    profitability

-   Showed Net Income of \$166 million and a 41% profit margin in fiscal
    year ending January 2012

-   Krispy Kreme maintains wholesale contracts with a wide variety of
    grocery stores, convenience stores, and other large
    accounts—including Wal-Mart, Kroger, and Sheetz

***Value Chain***

1.  Doughnut recipe

-   Unique taste

-   Produced, controlled, and consistent

-   Distributed to all stores and franchises

1.  Manufacturing

-   Design and manufacture of the doughnut making equipment

-   This is then sold to stores for profit and ensures consistency of
    end product

1.  Retail Distribution

-   Mixture and equipment is distributed to large factory stores

-   Mix of factory stores that supply smaller stores

-   Outsourced retail channels in service stations and Wal-Mart

1.  Store Experience

-   Worldwide Locations

-   Freshly baked and produced doughnuts each day

-   Original glazed recipe

-   Simple product line

![](media/image1.png){width="8.20625in" height="9.270833333333334in"}

![](media/image2.png){width="8.52361111111111in"
height="5.5in"}![](media/image3.png){width="8.208333333333334in"
height="4.5in"}

![](media/image4.png){width="8.456944444444444in"
height="9.622222222222222in"}

![](media/image5.png){width="7.947916666666667in"
height="4.25in"}![](media/image6.png){width="8.447916666666666in"
height="5.121527777777778in"}***Interactive Chart***

![](media/image7.png){width="5.033333333333333in"
height="6.729166666666667in"}![](media/image8.png){width="6.288888888888889in"
height="3.9375in"}

![](media/image9.png){width="4.269444444444445in"
height="4.864583333333333in"}

![](media/image10.png){width="4.25in" height="3.8541666666666665in"}

***Competitor Analysis***

-   Primarily competes in the Quick-Service Restaurant (QSR) segment of
    the restaurant industry

-   It also competes on a wholesale level in the Baked Goods Production
    Industry

-   Competitive rivals include: Dunkin Donuts as their closest
    competitor, Starbucks, Tim Horton’s, Shipley’s Do-Nuts and other
    smaller bakeries

-   Dunkin Donuts has 628.2M in sales compared to Krispy Kreme having
    just 403.22M

-   Dunkin Donuts is offered in 30 countries while Krispy Kreme is only
    in 20 countries

-   The firm is able to generate higher ROA and ROE as compared to
    Dunkin Donuts

-   Krispy Kreme has a significantly lower leverage ratio as compared to
    Dunkin’s extremely high 195%

-   They face less direct competition from McDonald’s, Starbucks, and
    coffee shops because of their inability to market coffee sales

-   Krispy Kreme also faces some competition with pre-packaged goods
    such as Little Debbie, Hostess and Sara Lee

-   As is the case with its competitors, Krispy Kreme has made a
    concerted effort as of late to expand revenues through coffee sales,
    but the dominant element of the Krispy Kreme business model
    continues to be doughnut sales

-   Dunkin Donuts generates approximately 60% of sales revenue from
    coffee and other beverages; Krispy Kreme continues to lag far behind
    in that regard with only 4% of its sales coming from coffee. They do
    have a plan to double coffee sales within the next two years, but
    they still don’t match up to companies such as Dunkin Donuts and
    Starbucks

-   One of the largest concerns in the overall competitive environment
    is the changing demands of consumers

-   As consumers become increasingly health conscious, the doughnut
    industry becomes more vulnerable to the threat of substitution,
    especially considering that each original glazed Krispy Kreme
    doughnut has 200 calories and 12 grams of fat

![](media/image11.png){width="5.5625in" height="3.8645833333333335in"}

***SWOT Analysis***

Krispy Kreme Doughnuts, Inc. (KKD) is a very successful well known
company that possesses various strengths. Krispy Kreme’s appeal extends
to all demographics, which is an impressive strength to the company. KKD
are enjoyed by all individuals regardless of age, size, race, and
income.

One of Krispy Kreme’s strengths is that they are a global firm. KKD has
established itself as a consumer brand with a consistent customer base
in both the United States and abroad. The company has branched out into
grocery and convenience stores in order to provide customers with more
accessibility to the brands products. Establishing their presence in
retail and wholesale environments proved to be a key component for this
company’s success.

Krispy Kreme generates revenue through four different business segments:
Company Stores, Domestic Franchises, International Franchises, and the
KK Supply Chain. Both the company’s stores and domestic franchises
operate similarly by earning revenue throughout retail operations as
well as wholesaling to grocery stores, convenience stores, and other
food venues. KKD has become quite popular in both convenience and
grocery stores. Due to the convenience, consumers can enjoy the famous
Krispy Kreme doughnuts without traveling to their retail locations and
instead purchase a quantity of donuts at a local supermarket. By selling
their products in stores Krispy Kreme has gained a huge advantage over
the competition. Majority of Krispy Kreme’s competitors, such as Dunkin
Donuts, do not sell their doughnut products in stores. This makes Krispy
Kreme a vertically integrated company with three retail unit
operations.[^19]

Not surprisingly, Krispy Kreme earns most of their revenue from doughnut
sales, comprising over 88% of all retail sales. The company also
provides a wide variety of flavors for their doughnuts, coffee, and
bakery items. Since Krispy Kreme is such a well known brand they are
able to sell various types of memorabilia including mugs, hats, shirts,
and toys.[^20]

Krispy Kreme’s concept of a “Doughnut Theater” has proven to be yet
strength for this company. The “Doughnut Theater” is a multi-sensory
experience that engulfs customers as they watch the doughnuts come off
the assembly line. The “Doughnut Theater” was introduced in the late
80’s when the company was experimenting with various innovative
marketing ideas. This concept exposes the doughnut-making equipment to
the customers inviting them to watch the doughnut making process in
stores. Visitors can observe the doughnuts through each phase starting
with the doughnuts being fried, to passing through a glazed waterfall,
and finally being then taken off the conveyer belt to be given to the
customers.

Another innovative marketing technique that Krispy Kreme has implemented
is the “Hot Doughnuts Now” sign in most retail stores. Through this
technique, passing individuals are alerted when fresh doughnuts are hot
off the line. Not all locations participate in this method, but the ones
that do participate have received a lot of foot traffic and
word-of-mouth advertising. An additional strength of KKD is their desire
for growth and success. The company has worked very hard to be where
they are today and is willing to keep up the momentum in order to
continue their success.

Lastly, the most important strength of Krispy Kreme is their product.
Krispy Kreme Doughnuts are a unique product that simply cannot be
duplicated. Their competition will never be able to replicate a Krispy
Kreme Doughnut unless they discover the ingredients to the secret
recipe. KKD products set them apart from other doughnut shops and are
the core of the company. When you think of Krispy Kreme you think of
fresh, hot, glazed doughnuts and they have done a great job capturing
that part of the market. Even though they offer other products, such as
coffee and crullers, Krispy Kreme will always be known primarily for
their doughnuts.[^21]

Although Krispy Kreme has various strengths they also have just as many
weaknesses. The main weakness that KKD faces is that the majority of
their products are unhealthy. We are living in a more health conscious
world where people are concerned about what they are eating and worry
about how bad certain products are. Krispy Kreme has been placed on “The
Unhealthiest Foods” list for many years. The Krispy Kreme menu clearly
lacks healthy options which can be a major turn off for some consumers.
Their products are known as sweat treats and therefore the company is
having a hard time incorporating the health-conscious customer. The
negative health effects from eating too many doughnuts include: heart
conditions, high blood sugar, high blood pressure, and a lack of
nutrients. Krispy Kreme famously is known for their glazed doughnuts,
however the threatening truth that the consumption of doughnuts could
one day cause health issues is a becoming a growing problem for the
company. A Krispy Kreme Original Glazed doughnut is made from at least
50 ingredients, mostly artificial food additives that increase your
risks of cancer, diabetes, heart disease, allergies, and digestive
disorders. Sugar has been named Public Enemy No. 1 by the health
conscious percentage of the population and a Krispy Kreme doughnut
contain plenty of.

With the population becoming increasingly dependent on technology,
consumers want what they want, when they want it. Many companies have
taken this mentality into consideration and have made ordering online
readily available to the customer. Krispy Kreme has little to no
presence online, which is surprising considering the technologically
advanced world. KKD doesn’t have any options to order online and later
pick up their order in stores. This poses as a threat to the company
because individuals want easy and convenient shopping which the internet
makes that possible. Due to the inconvenience, consumers might decide to
purchase their doughnut elsewhere.

Another issue is that Krispy Kreme relies too much on their brand
recognition when in reality they should be up updating their service in
order to stay current. Krispy Kreme does little advertising and what
advertising they currently do is not aggressive enough to catch buyer’s
attention.

The KKD menu is also a weakness. Krispy Kreme’s menu is weak and could
use some redesign to attract a larger target audience. By adding more
unique products to their menu, Krispy Kreme could potentially attract
more customers. The notion is that KKD sells only doughnuts when in
actuality they also have other baked goods and coffee. The company has
also been hit hard during times when the economy was doing poorly.
Krispy Kreme has had a handful of years where they were losing money and
close to going bankrupt.[^22]

Krispy Kreme also struggles with rapid expansion as well. They had such
booming success in the company’s early years, but now moving too fast
can cause major problems for the company. The rapid expansion was not
fully thought or planned out and therefore resulted in exponential
growth in certain store locations and huge losses and struggles in
others. Due to this rapid expansion, Krispy Kreme has experienced their
first unprofitable quarter and cannot afford to let that happen again.

Another weakness that Krispy Kreme faces is their corporate structure.
There have been numerous board members, presidents, and CEO’s throughout
the company’s history that is has proven to be a disadvantage. In the
consumer or investors eyes, it is not a good look when a company’s CEO
is constantly changing. By the constant fluctuation of leadership and
management, to outsiders it appears as if the company does not know what
they are doing.[^23]

Krispy Kreme has many possible opportunities to become more successful
than they have been in the past. As discussed earlier, healthier food
options pose as a weakness for Krispy Kreme which is a threat that they
should be improving. It is apparent that the introduction of the whole
wheat doughnut and the bite size doughnut options were not enough for
the company to be considered a healthy dinning option. Krispy Kreme also
introduced a number of juices, Naked Smoothie drinks, and yogurt options
which were implemented in a few retail locations. However, these changes
have not made a large impact. If Krispy Kreme focused on creating
healthier options to introduce to consumers, they will be able to
attract more people from the health conscious population.

Another helpful suggestion would be that Krispy Kreme should focus more
on the coffee market. KKD currently offers a coffee option but it is not
as successful as predicted. The coffee market is one that is very easy
for KKD to enter because their product goes great with coffee. When
people think of breakfast they instantly think of coffee and doughnuts
because they go hand and hand. If Krispy Kreme adds new flavors or
options for their coffee and advertises them properly then it is
conceivable that more people would be attracted to their offer. Many
people don’t know that Krispy Kreme currently sells coffee, therefore
marketing correctly is the key.

Another opportunity for growth and success for Krispy Kreme are foreign
markets. The company has always done well internationally but further
expansion could lead to an increase in revenue and brand recognition.
KKD first international shop was opened in 2001 in Canada, just outside
of Toronto. Now Krispy Kreme has stores and operates in 24 different
countries around the world. Each store offers different products
depending on the country in which they are operating. For example, in
Australia Krispy Kreme offers the Mudcake doughnut which is a devil food
cake doughnut glazed and topped with a chocolate coating. In South Korea
they offer the Tiramisu Soft Ring doughnut which is a thick smooth ring
doughnut with mascarpone cheese filling, cocoa powder, and espresso for
a blend of taste. Krispy Kreme has proven to be successful in foreign
markets but continuing their growth domestically is something that they
should strive for.

Today, the closest Krispy Kreme location in relation to Boston is
located in Connecticut, which is approximately 80.28 miles away. Because
their brand recognition is so strong, they will be able to slowly begin
opening more stores across the United States while also keeping in mind
the problems they faced with rapid expansion in the past. By advancing
advertising efforts Krispy Kreme can remain relevant and keep their
consumers in the loop. Krispy Kreme does not actively participate in
much advertisement which is a main concern that needs improvement. If
they become more prevalent in TV commercials, ads on the radio, and
social media marketing then they might have a chance to hit a new
audience.

Krispy Kreme Doughnuts faces many threats due to the market that they
are present in. The biggest threat that Krispy Kreme faces is their
competition. They have many competitors both domestic and abroad in
various sizes. Over the past two decades, competition in the fast-food
market has increased. Krispy Kreme’s biggest competitors include:
Dunkin’ Donuts, Tim Hortons, Starbucks, and local bakeries. Dunkin’
Donuts has a unique selling proposition stating, “America Runs on
Dunkin.” Historically, Dunkin’ Donuts is the world’s largest coffee and
donut shop, serving more than 3 million coffees a day. This competitor
alone makes it very difficult for Krispy Kreme to attempt further
tackling the world of coffee. Dunkin’ Donuts and Starbucks have almost
all of the coffee market locked up leaving Krispy Kreme with the
challenge of trying to break through.[^24]

Tim Horton’s, which is a Canadian based company, focuses on “always
fresh” coffee, baked goods and home-style breakfast, and lunches in a
quick-service restaurant. Another threat they face is competition in
local bakeries. Many people like the idea of going to their local “mom
and pop” bakery to buy pastries rather than supporting a chain such as
Krispy Kreme. Rivals are concerned about Krispy Kreme’s rapid growth,
market share gains, and erosion of their own market positions.
Therefore, competitors may be compelled to rejuvenate their menus,
product quality, and strategies in order to stay ahead of the possible
advances of Krispy Kreme.

Health conscious consumers are also a threat to Krispy Kreme. If
consumers continue to be health and nutrition conscious, leading them to
avoid doughnuts, the company may face a continued slow market growth and
flat and diminishing sales.

***Strategies***

Beginning with Krispy Kreme’s core competencies, leadership,
individuality, and philanthropy are the main themes that the
organization has built their business upon. The resources that Krispy
Kreme has accumulated throughout its existence are in a large thanks to
the solid foundation ratified, which in return fostered a sustainable
environment safe to compete in. The great internal leadership from
Morgan has enabled Krispy Kreme the opportunity to exercise its
resources in compliance with its core competencies, strengths, and
capabilities. Therefore, in order to further increase the overall
efficiency and effectiveness of a business, its operational strategies
must be updated or innovated once self-identified.

Resources such as refined management tools, training manuals, and
hands-on employee training are often under utilized even though these
tools can do great damage especially if practiced behind great
leadership. Since Krispy Kreme leadership has suggested that it is now
aiming at greater investments in human capital, I think it it’s time for
the firm to enhance its ambiance by incorporating the human touch. Brand
equity is a very noticeable strength that Krispy Kreme can still expand
upon with the help of employees whose purpose is to create a resonating
experience outside of the donut theater. For example, changing the
climate of a Krispy Kreme retail store to attract young professionals or
the whole millennial generation will be the best target market to
monetize domestically. Millennials makeup the majority of the people in
the United States and are also the most educated generation to exist.
Since the dining spaces have a quick turnover anyways, innovating that
space into a “think tank” “incubator” or simply a place that attracts
the most valuable element of any economy – an idea. This is a low cost
implementation that wouldn’t require significant change to the
infrastructure of the firm. The core competencies of Krispy Kreme
reflect an accurate depiction of the millennial essence.

Another route leadership could consider going in the implication of
joint ventures where a bakery and medical marijuana dispensary would
both operate. The joint ventures would begin in states that have already
completely legalized both the use of recreational and medical marijuana.
Starting in states that have no laws regarding the usage of personal
marijuana would prevent adverse reactions or cultural shock to areas
that aren’t ready. Individuality, leadership, and philanthropy also tie
in fairly accurately regarding the essence of marijuana. Furthermore,
the real excitement of this implementation comes from the added revenue
stream. Just like donuts, marijuana is now being package and sold as a
commodity. This cash crop currently has one of the highest demands,
while generating millions of dollars that eventually can be reinvested
back into a local community. If this measure were to be executed, Krispy
Kreme would further differentiate itself, separating itself from the
current industries it identifies with. Eventually this has the potential
to become the first American version of the European coffee house model.

The final implementation strategy suggested would be the most simplistic
of the three regarding execution. The single most important thing all
brands must make sure they are active on social media outlets. This is
an essential for all brands because it’s important to have an open
channel of dynamic communication toward your audience.

[^1]: <http://www.cluteinstitute.com/ojs/index.php/JBCS/article/view/4771/4861>

[^2]: <https://www.krispykreme.com/about/Our-Story>

[^3]: <https://www.krispykreme.com/about>

[^4]: <https://www.krispykreme.com/about/>

[^5]: <http://www.cluteinstitute.com/ojs/index.php/JBCS/article/view/4771/4861>

[^6]: <https://www.krispykreme.com/about/Our-Story>

[^7]: <http://study.com/academy/lesson/code-of-business-conduct-ethics-standards-examples.html>

[^8]: <http://investor.shareholder.com/synaptics/corporate-governance-document.cfm?documentid=4754>

[^9]: <http://investor.shareholder.com/synaptics/corporate-governance-document.cfm?documentid=4754>

[^10]: <http://www.scribd.com/doc/51583175/Casestudy-on-Krispy-Kreme-doughnut#scribd>

[^11]: <http://www.harbott.com/2011/01/12/analysing-strategic-forces-that-shape-industries-with-pest/>

[^12]: <http://www.scribd.com/doc/51583175/Casestudy-on-Krispy-Kreme-doughnut#scribd>

[^13]: <http://www.scribd.com/doc/51583175/Casestudy-on-Krispy-Kreme-doughnut#scribd>

[^14]: <http://www.angelfire.com/indie/dannydiab/fin821kkd.htm>

[^15]: <http://www.scribd.com/doc/51583175/Casestudy-on-Krispy-Kreme-doughnut#scribd>

[^16]: <http://www.krispykreme.com/about/Philanthropy>

[^17]: <http://www.scribd.com/doc/51583175/Casestudy-on-Krispy-Kreme-doughnut#scribd>

[^18]: <http://hotnews.krispykreme.com/blog/rotating-featured-content/krispy-kreme-rolls-out-new-customer-loyalty-app-select-markets>

[^19]: http://mergent.firstresearch-learn.com/industry.aspx?chapter=0&pid=414

[^20]: <http://topics.nytimes.com/top/news/business/companies/krispy-kreme-doughnuts-inc/index.html>

[^21]: http://mergent.firstresearch-learn.com/industry.aspx?chapter=0&pid=414

[^22]: http://subscriber.hoovers.com/H/company360/overview.html?companyId=53559000000000

[^23]: http://subscriber.hoovers.com/H/company360/overview.html?companyId=53559000000000

[^24]: <http://www.forbes.com/sites/panosmourdoukoutas/2013/04/25/dunkin-brands-or-krispy-kreme/>
