---
title: "Google - An In-depth Analysis"
layout: post
date: 2016-04-27
tag:
- Google
- Case study
- Search Engine
blog: true
star: true
permalink: /google/
---

<span id="h.gjdgxs" class="anchor"></span>

**Google - Case Study**

By: Robyn Crean, Jason DiCarlo,

Amy Granville, Isaiah King

***Table of Contents***

*Pages*

1.  Company Background 3 - 8

2.  General Environmental Analysis 9 - 16

3.  Industry Analysis 17 - 24

4.  Competitor Analysis 25 - 28

5.  Internal Analysis 29 - 32

6.  SWOT 33 - 38

7.  Strategies 39 - 42

8.  Works Cited 43 - 45

***Company Background***

America's top search engine company, Google Inc., was founded in 1996 by
Sergey Brin and Larry Page. The two met at Stanford University where the
concept of Google began simply as a research project. This project
transformed into a search engine that was originally designed to examine
connecting links between web pages in order to determine a site's
authority. In 1998, Page and Brin set up their first data center in
Page's dorm. As their project slowly began to grow, the duo was noticed
by fellow Stanford Alumni, David Filo, the creator of Yahoo, who
encouraged them to continue their efforts.[^1]

Their next step was to seek out investors to back them up. Andy
Bechtolsheim, one founder of Sun Microsystems, invested \$100,000 in the
company after receiving a demo of their search technology. Eventually,
Page and Brin were able to raise over \$1million. Now with plenty of
investors to support the duo this was the perfect time for the company,
which was in the midst of a dot-com boom, to emerge into the market.[^2]

Google Inc. was officially established on September 7, 1998 in a
friend’s garage in California. The name “Google” was derived from a
misspelling of Page’s original name, “Googol,” which is a mathematical
term for the number 1 followed by 100 zeroes.[^3]  By the end of 1999,
Brin and Page dropped out of Stanford’s Graduate Program in order to
concentrate on the company.

By mid-1999, Google received a \$25million round of venture capital
funding and processing 500,000 queries per day. In their humble
beginnings, Google served over 10,000 queries daily and quickly gained a
reputation as a trustworthy source of information.[^4] By 2000,
Google.com released different versions of the site offering various
languages such as: French, German, Italian, Swedish, Finnish, Spanish,
Portuguese, Dutch, Norwegian, Danish, Chinese, Japanese, and Korean. Now
that the website could be used internationally, Google’s growth
continued.[^5]

By 2002, the Google News Service was launched. This service offers users
a “comprehensive up-to-date news coverage, aggregated from sources all
over the world.”[^6] Later in 2005 Google released: Google Maps, Google
Earth, and iGoogle. These services gave Google a larger range of
products in order to reach out to an even larger audience.[^7]

A new verb, “to Google” was officially added to the Oxford English
Dictionary on June 15, 2005. In 2006, Google took a huge step forward by
purchasing YouTube. YouTube, the world's most popular online video site,
hosts users who are watching approximately 4billion hour’s worth of
videos each month as well as uploading 72 hours worth of videos every
minute. Originally, YouTube planned on operating independently, while
its co-founders and 67 employees worked within Google.[^8]

In 2007, Gmail became available to the general public. Venturing into
the email market was a huge step for Google. Also in 2007, Google made
its largest acquisition to date, purchasing the online advertising firm,
DoubleClick, for \$3.1billion. Over the next couple of years Google
continued to introduce products that would keep them relevant as well as
showing diversity.

The introduction of Google Chrome, the company’s first web browser,
began in 2008 and quickly took off. Following Google Chrome was the
release of their first Android-based phone, the T-Mobile G1. The
following year, Sergey Brin and Larry Page were named the fifth most
powerful people in the world by Forbes magazine.

In 2011, the long awaited Google +1 was launched. Google launched a
promotional video for the +1 button explaining the social feature. "When
you click +1, you're telling your friends, your family and the rest of
the world, 'This is something you should check out!”[^9] This feature,
which is very similar to Facebook’s “Like” button, was Google’s attempt
to branch out into the social media market.

Overall, Google offers many services and devices but they are best known
for their search engine. Google has branched out into various services
over the years which has helped them become the successful company they
are today. Their primary and most successful service is Google Search.
Google revealed that they are procession 100billion searches per month
or 1.2trillion per year.

Gmail is by far the best email platform in the world. Embraced by
millions it has changed the way many individuals communicate. Google has
opened up the email market by diminishing the worry of storage by
allowing users unlimited space, allowing them to save as many emails as
they deem.

Google Maps has been around for quite some time but didn’t really become
successful until the app was installed onto phones.[^10] Originally,
Google Maps used to be a case of printed off addresses with scrawled
directions. Today, with its updated technology, Google Maps is a popular
application used by drivers in order to navigate.[^11]

Google News was launched in 2009 and remains one of the top sources for
news on a daily basis. On Google’s website, Google Earth is described as
a “virtual globe, map and geographical information program.”[^12]

Google Apps are used by people worldwide on a daily basis. These
features include Google Calendar, Google Talk (Chat), and Google
Docs/Slides/Sheets. The newly popular Google Docs, Slides, and Sheets
are productivity apps that allow individuals to create different types
of documents online, working on them in real time with other people, as
well as storing them in a Google Drive online free of cost. Another
innovative feature is that Google Docs automatically saves ones work to
their drive, elimination the fear of losing all material if ones
computer crashes or shuts down.[^13]

Google Alerts is a small but useful little product that many people
depend on to keep them informed of personal or brand mentions. Other
features that Google offers thar are usually overlooked include: Picasa,
FeedBurner, Google Translate, Google Books Blogger, Google Street View,
and Orkut. There are other tools used by students and big companies as
well including: Google Scholar, Google Analytics, Google Ventures,
Adwords, Google Voice, and Google Finance. The Scholar, Analytic, and
Finance tools are the most popular in the business world and are
extremely reliable providing real time information.[^14]

Google has also bought other companies in order to add more to their
resume. Google's first acquisition was the Usenet Company, Deja
News,[^15] and its services then became Google Groups.[^16] Next, Google
acquired Dodgeball,[^17] a social networking service company,[^18] and
eventually replaced it with Google Latitude.[^19]

Other acquisitions include web application company JotSpot,[^20] which
became Google Sites. Later, voice over IP’s company, GrandCentral, later
became Google Voice, and video hosting service company Next New Networks
became YouTube Next Lab and Audience Development Group.[^21]

Lastly, Google has also ventured out into the mobile cell phone market.
They sell a range of Nexus and Android phones, which are not yet Apple’s
level, but are quickly gaining attention.

Google offers products that most individuals need or could use on a
daily basis, with the list continuing to grow. By increasing their
product diversity to their list, Google is successfully adapting with
the times and staying relevant. Today, Google may be a huge success
however staying on top is an important key factor in their future
success.

***General Environmental Analysis***

*Technological Trends*

Google is a popular search engine that uses text-matching techniques to
find web pages that are important and relevant to a user’s search
handling more than three billion searches per day.[^22] Google’s primary
technological advance is its web search functionality. It is an
indispensable feature of the Internet as well as an essential factor to
its business.[^23] Due to the never ending change in technology,
programmers and engineers are working constantly to ensure search
results are as relevant as possible. More time is devoted to this
process than any other Google product. Google is not only a search
engine but also provides many services, tools, and products through its
website.

Google Apps is a set of web applications provided by Google. These
applications include Gmail, Google Docs, Google Calendar, Google Mobile,
and Google Sites.[^24] Gmail is a free e-mail service created by Google
that provides users with storage for their personal or business messages
and offers the ability to search for specific messages. This program
automatically organizes messages into a conversation thread and has an
advanced spam-filtering technique.[^25]

Anther app produced by Google is Google Docs. Google Docs is an online
word processor, presentation, spreadsheet, and form application. This
app allows numerous users to collaborate together in “real-time” to
create, share, open, and edit documents online simultaneously. Forms can
be created directly on the web interface, or users an upload existing
documents for group online editing. All documents edited or created
online can be saved to a user’s computer in various formats. As a useful
feature for users, Google servers automatically save all file data In
order to avoid data loss.[^26] Although Google Docs is less
“feature-rich” as full desktop applications, such as Microsoft Office,
Google Docs is available for use to anyone with a web browser.

Google Calendar is a calendar web application provided by Google
allowing users to view, create, and manage their calendar events. It
allows for online and mobile access, synchronization to applications and
mobile devices, event reminders, and easy sharing with friends or
coworkers.[^27] This software allows users to drag-and-drop in order to
easily move events around from various dates or hours without having to
reload another page. It also supports various viewing modes including:
daily, weekly, monthly, and agenda views.

Mobile computing is becoming the future of technology and the Internet,
therefore Google created Google Mobile in order to stay ahead of the
mobile trend. Google Mobile is free applications of services provided by
Google in order to enhance a user’s mobile experience. These apps can be
used on any mobile device and include Gmail, Search, Maps, and
YouTube.[^28]

<span id="h.30j0zll" class="anchor"></span> Another popular
technological trend is cloud computing. Therefore, Google created Google
Cloud, a cloud computing platform. This cloud is a network made of
approximately one million servers which store data. Each server dies
after three years and is replaced by a newer and faster server allowing
Google’s cloud to regenerate its computing power. Google Cloud Storage
allows for world-wide storage and retrieval of any amount of data at any
time. Google Cloud Storage allows users to store date on Google’s
infrastructure with high reliability, performance, and
availability.[^29]

Google recently launched its new Google Apps Marketplace, the first
viable platform for cloud computing from third parties. This product is
an online store that ultimately aims to assist individuals and
organizations to discover, purchase, and deploy integrated cloud web
applications that work with Google Apps or third party software.[^30]

Another way Google is fighting to stay the best in the field of
technology by purchasing various start-up companies that allow Google to
benefit from the dynamism and creativity that these companies may bring.
These companies specialties range in variety of fields such as:
security, advertising, video, file sharing, shopping, and mobile
technology.[^31]

Another form of technology besides apps is server hardware. Google,
unlike other companies, does not purchase its servers but instead builds
their own. In 2006, Google was ranked the fourth largest server
manufacturer in the world. Google continues to differ from other
companies when it comes to their storage. Instead of investing in costly
devices, Google uses a low-price, high-redundancy model. Lastly, another
item that Google obtains at cheaper prices is bandwidth. Google pays
minimal prices for bandwidth due to their large-scale purchase of “dark
fiber.”[^32]

Google is not only a company providing internet services and mobile
applications but also have a line of hardware products. The Google Store
invites consumers to Google’s hardware products that include phones,
tablets, Chromebooks, TV & audio devices, and various accessories for
said products. As technological advances increase, Google will continue
to be successful with their original search engine and apps while also
venturing out into various types of hardware.

*Demographic Trends*

Google is targeted generally towards everyone however, has a relatively
young user base. About 60% of Americans visit Google weekly, most users
being young, under 50, and college educated. Google is less affected by
the ages of Baby Boomers compared to other companies which depend on the
50-60 year-old demographic group. The ratio of males to females is not
affected because internet searching is not a gender specific issue. The
company will further benefit from traditional or paternalistic societies
begin using the internet more frequently.[^33]

*Economic Trends*

Although the United States is in a period of recession, companies like
Google are not affected because search and internet-based advertisements
have become a staple in society and the economy. Google’s focus is
currently on highly targeted measurable advertising which makes the
company recession-proof.[^34] Google has gained an increase in demand
for its services and increasing profit levels due to more business
advertising. The company is expected to increase in profit levels
regardless of the state of the economy due to the growing trend of
businesses advertising online.[^35]

Countries such as South Africa, India, China, and the United Kingdom
have had increases in their Gross Domestic Products (GDP) which could
potentially be a positive factor for Google. If these countries continue
to grow at stable rates, Google’s internal and external investments will
be high in numbers. The growing amount of users on the internet and
search engine will positively affect Google.[^36]

Interest rates can both positively and negatively affect an
organization. Google relies primarily on investments, which come with
interest rates. As these rates gradually increase over time in a country
Google will benefit. For example, in the UK the rate average is around
8.2%, and in the U.S. rates stand at 6.1%. The more companies that have
an increase in rates and money, the more likely they will be willing to
spend on advertisements, a service provided by Google.[^37]

Inflation rates are a problem for customers whereas companies benefit
from it. The U.S., U.K., India, and China have recorded averages in
inflation rates of 2.5% - 9.5% annually. From this, raw materials become
more expensive resulting in companies to increase prices of their
products. As the product price increases, so does the cost of a Google
advertisement, resulting in more profits for the company.[^38]

*Political Trends*

Most governments do not have legal or political laws for online
information sharing, therefore Google’s operations remain unaffected.
However, over time Google has received numerous concerns from customers
in regards to user privacy. The company then responded by adding a
privacy link to their home page. This link brings users to Google’s
Privacy Center page where individuals can learn more about Google’s
policies in regards to political and legal issues.[^39]

Another legal issue Google faces is copyright. This company stores
copies of third party web pages and images on their servers, some of
which are copyright infringements. In response, Google released a
Copyright Information Page providing information on digital information
as well as links to notify Google and the U.S. Copyright Office of any
suspected infringement.[^40]

The Chinese Government is posing as a threat towards Google in regards
to censoring search results. China has created a barrier against Google
by creating regulations that forbid the search engine from operation on
their terms. In 2013, the Chinese Government created a surveillance
system called the Golden Shield, which monitors civilian use of the
internet.[^41]

*Sociolocultural Trends*

Sociocultural trends affect the way that customers respond to Google’s
products. Today, there is an increase in use of social media. Although
social media sites offer online advertising for companies, such as
Google, social media poses as a threat. As the use of these sites
increase, so do competing sites such as Facebook.[^42]

*Global Trends*

The internet and search applies to most cultures worldwide, therefore
Google does not face a geographic dependence. Google has 20 offices in
the U.S. and other locations in over 30 countries. Google now offers
personalized search engines for over 115 countries. As language support
improves the company will likely gain market shares. Once computers
become more affordable in various countries, those in economically
disadvantaged countries will be able to gain access to the internet for
the first time. Google will then be able to introduce these new users to
its search engine and productivity products.[^43]

***Industry Analysis***

Through a qualitative and quantitative analysis of the Web Search
segment, the standout characteristics include: Intense Rivalries,
Diversification, and Vertically Integrated Business Modeling. The focus
of this industry analysis is Google, although it operates within several
different industry codes made up by the North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS) and Standard Industry Codes (SIC).[^44]

An understanding of the essence of the climate in which Google performs
an examination of its key competitors is necessary. The atmosphere, or
climate, of the U.S Web Search segment that Yahoo, Microsoft, and Google
perform within has been developed by the post-industrial society
beginning to unfold. The post-industrial society is the stage of
society's development when the service sector generates more wealth than
the manufacturing sector of the economy. The important connection
between post-industrial societies and the firms competing in the Web
Search segment is the fact that these companies function as services,
opposed to manufacturers.

For this analysis, “post-industrial” is used in an economical or
sociological manner. The post-industrialized society is characterized by
the increased value of knowledge. In an economical sense,
post-industrialization is characterized by employment growing faster in
the third and fourth sector in contrast to employment in the primary and
secondary sector. This results in the third and fourth sector having the
most influence in the economy. Thus, the “impact of the expert” will
grow larger allowing power to be monopolized by knowledge. Since the
third and fourth sectors are essentially knowledge-oriented, a
restructuring of education is likely to occur. Post-industrial societies
are oriented around places of knowledge in which influence the
production of experts. Consequently, the demographic that will benefit
the most in the post-industrial society are young urban professionals
due to their effective yet efficient utilization of technology,
information, and networks.[^45]

Industrialization is the large-scale introduction of manufacturing,
advanced technical enterprises, and other productive economic activity
into an area, society, or country. The definition of this era contains a
timestamp along with an expiration date because the concept of
large-scale manufacturing is no longer under developed. The factors that
were once the main driving force of the industrial economy, labor and
mass manufacturing, quickly are beginning to fade. The new factors
driving the post-industrial economics and society are networks,
information, data, and technology.

New firms such as Uber, AirBnB, and Kickstarter are beginning establish
themselves as early adapters in this new age by designing business
models around the projected economical driving forces. There are also
many already existing firms who are embracing this economical and social
change. Google, Yahoo, Microsoft, and Apple are amongst the world’s top
innovators because they are disrupting the concept of an industry. These
firms have the capability of existing under a single company although
they may operate within dozens of industries. Thanks to the increased
value of knowledge from companies and consumers, concepts such as crowd
sourcing and vertically integrated business models are beginning to help
develop the post-industrialization era.

The Web Search and Advertising segment is considered to be under the
broad category of Internet services, in which the post-industrial era
has birthed. The Search Engine segment has only three direct competitors
who own substantial market share.

In order to properly evaluate this segments attractiveness, Porter’s
Five Forces Model will be used to measure and examine the competitive
playing field. Microsoft Corporation's Bing, Yahoo Inc.'s Yahoo Search,
and Google Inc.’s Google Search are key competitors amongst each other.

The biggest threats may come from search engines within websites and
apps that offer more than just searches, such as Amazon and Facebook.
Thus, the possibility of an existing competitor who doesn’t have a
substantial amount of the search engine market share is moderate to
high.[^46] The post-industrial economy has enabled Facebook and Amazon
compete naturally within the same environment as Google Search because
the ability and function of “searching” is critical online or offline,
therefore the implementation of a search function has been integrated on
many levels across technology.

What makes the threat of substitution dangerously high for Google is the
amount of traffic that Facebook and Amazon experience. According to
Alexa.com, the most popular referred website regarding traffic analytics
shows that Facebook.com ranks second domestically and globally. Amazon
also ranks very high in annual traffic that could potentially lead to
the substitution of Google. Although Google ranks number one globally
and domestically, the threat of one of these key competitors developing
an improved search engine still exists.[^47]

The social aspect of Facebook, or the consumerist outlet like Amazon,
both have a greater need for a more optimized search engine. For
example, if one needed to know what kind what the process, or materials
needed, in order to replace a radio within a 2015 Ford Mustang. The
function of an optimized search engine within Amazon.com would allow for
consumers learn what they could from Google while also providing the
most popular online marketplace. This would be good for Amazon because
it will increase user retention by forcing them to stay one website for
access to knowledge and a marketplace. This would also lead increased
traffic for Amazon because there would be less of a need for Google’s
weaker search engine.

Theoretically, if Amazon and Facebook were to develop a stronger search
engine, Google would be virtually useless. However, if Google continued
to dominate the science of search engineering, competitors who pose a
threat of substitution, will still have full functionality.

What prevents Facebook, Amazon, or any new entrant from competing within
this segment is due to the complexity, popularity, and strength of
Google’s search engine. The differentiation of Google’s service brings
with it a strong customer loyalty by providing unique searching
experiences acts as one of the strongest barrios block new entrants from
this segment. Web search functionality is ultimately how Google began
and still remains at the heart of what they do today. Google’s web
search is considered to be indispensable due to its investments within
research and development and human capital. These investments have
allowed the programmers and engineers of Google to constantly make
search results and page rankings as relevant as possible. Google’s
searching service also has the global market firmly grasped. The firm’s
web search service is operates 160 localized country/regional domains.
Google also offers the ability to search for results in 130 different
languages. The low threat of new entries also comes from within Google’s
vertically integrated business model. What this allows is instead of
buying server hardware from HP, Dell, and IBM, Google instead creates
their own servers. The Gartner Group, and information technology
research and advisory firm estimated in 2006 that Google was the fourth
largest server manufacturer in the world. The expense of storage is
unusually low for a firm such as Google because they invest in hardware
that isn’t expected to be of high quality but instead low in
price.”[^48] There are wide spread rumors of Google paying very little
costs for bandwidth usage. Costs for bandwidth are believed to be so low
due to the investments Google made in “dark fiber” – fiber optic cable
that was laid in the dot-com era. As of April 2010, Millward Brown
Optimor, a consultancy who issues annual reports aimed at measuring the
intangible worth of brands, named Google to be in the top four of that
category.

Ultimately, Google isn’t worried about the threat of substitution. The
threat of substitution is low because Google essentially depends on the
Internet’s existence and functionality for its survival, rather than
traditionally performing within a competitive environment. While its
competitors where spending millions on building brand during the dot-com
boom, Google instead focused on quietly building upon its strongest
barrier of entrance, the search engine.

One of the most effective ways to remove the threat of supplier power is
through the implementation of a vertically intergraded business model.
This worked in the favor of Google as an advantage because it removed
the dependence of outsourcing less effective components from other
firms. This allowed Google to customize their servers and also become
the fourth largest sever manufacturer in the world. Google also holds
immense supplier power toward its consumers through Adwords. Adwords has
become an easy and common way for companies and individuals to generate
revenue through their websites. Other competitors within the Web Search
segment face more of a threat from suppliers due to strategy of
outsourcing. This threat at large isn’t much worry for these competitors
because hardware such as servers has become commodities for large
business. Although, storage along with bandwidth have been known to be
harder or more expensive to obtain suppliers. The chance of any of these
suppliers entering the Search Engine segment is highly unlikely.

As mentioned previously, Google and its competitors generally depend on
the Internet’s existence and functionality for their survival. Since
Google and the other competitors of the Web Search segment provide a
service that is free, there’s virtually no buying power that’s even able
to exist.

Through the utilization of Porters Five Forces model, the Web search
segment has proved itself to be attractive. Competitors within this
segment, such as Google, have set barriers for substitution or new
entrants very high. Google has invested incomparable amounts of research
and development into its Web search service versus its competitors Yahoo
and Bing. In 2009, Google spent 12% of its operating expense dollars
versus Microsoft who spent 15%. Even though Microsoft seemingly spent
more on research and development, it is important to note that Microsoft
is in the business of hardware, so it’s important that one assumes that
not all of that 15% is being allocated to its Web Search segment. In
2013, Google was the top 9^th^ spender globally in research and
development.[^49]

Google is in the business of advertising and EMarketer estimates that
Google's 2015 search ad revenue will grow to \$44 billion worldwide, a
54.5% share, with Microsoft and Yahoo combined taking just 6.5%.[^50]
The threat of any new entrance seems likely to be the biggest threat
within this segment, although it is highly unlikely. Indirect
competitors such as Facebook and Amazon have almost all the resources to
enter this segment as a top competitor. The amount of intellectual
capital these two competing firms contain is still not enough to take
the top spot because Google has developed its service intensively for
more than two decades. The algorithms and web crawling techniques Google
has developed has prevented any substitute or new entry within the Web
Search segment from outperforming the firm, almost creating a
monopolized segment. The result of these segments and their
attractiveness also rely on the low position that buyers and suppliers
have. The vertically integrated business model Google has implemented
has prevented suppliers from having any type of power. Other competitors
face a low to medium threat due to not having full control of their
needed supplies, although hardware such as servers are being sold as
commodities to large business. Buyer power is relatively low, although
Google and Bing’s Web Search service income depends on the purchase of
advertising space that individuals and companies seek out. But since Web
Search is most commonly utilized as a free service, buying power doesn’t
have much influence. The completive environment of the Web Search
segment has arguably become a duopoly that is dictated by Google and
Bing. Bing and Yahoo’s search engine combined, make up 32% percent of
the U.S. market, while Google accounts for 64%. Although it seems
unlikely that Bing will overtake Google, the search engines within
Facebook, Amazon, and other sites could shift how Internet search
segments perform and compete.

***Competitor Analysis***

[^51]

               **Google**   **Yahoo**
  ------------ ------------ -----------
  Market Cap   495.93B      33.20B
  Employees    59,976       12,500
  Revenue      71.76B       4.95B
  Net Income   15.44B       242.18M
  EPS          23.72        0.26

The competitive industries that Google operates in cannot be classified
by using only one or two industries. Its diversified portfolio spans a
wide array of products and services, all revolving around the
opportunities brought on by the advent of the Internet. For these
reasons Google’s main competitors include: Yahoo, Microsoft, and Apple.
These companies are diversified to include several industries with the
common goal of each company, to provide innovative products and services
that offer consumers with the ability to access, distribute, create, and
use computer data. For this analysis we will focus on the search engine
product offered by these companies, with Yahoo being the closest
competitor.

In 1994, Stanford University students Jerry Wang and David Flo created
Yahoo when they developed “an Internet bookmark list and directory of
interesting sites.” Ultimately in 2000, Yahoo formed a partnership with
Google that allowed them to power Yahoo’s organic results thus
effectively introducing “their largest competitor to the world,” making
Google a “household name” and in the process, cutting its own throat.
Five years later Google was out performing Yahoo and by 2009 it had
captured 70% of the search engine market share.

![](media/image03.png){width="6.0in" height="3.5in"}

As shown in the above table from November 2015, Google’s Market
Capitalization is approximately fifteen times that of Yahoo’s. In terms
of Market Share for search engines, Google has approximately 69% of the
market, Yahoo has 9%, Bing has 12% and Baidu (China) has 7% of the
market.[^52]

![](media/image06.png){width="6.0in" height="3.5in"}[^53]

Microsoft has the highest revenue out of the three search engines,
however, when you break the numbers down and look purely at advertising
revenue from the search engine, Google Search edges out Bing by about
\$8million.[^54] Overall, Google derives approximately 99% of its
revenue from advertising. Although Yahoo is clearly not competing, they
have recently shifted their focus on their search engine and are finally
seeing their hard work pay off. Yahoo also stretched out the one
positive revenue streak it had going, increasing its search revenue
year-over-year for the fifth straight quarter.[^55]

***Value Chain***

![](media/image05.jpg){width="6.75625in" height="2.736111111111111in"}

Google gathers all the web users it can by inviting them to use its
top-rated search product with highly relevant results delivered
promptly. Then, through assorted advertisements it directs these same
web users in the form of traffic to its advertising partners who
transform the traffic into sales on their sites. Google adds value not
only by directing a quantity of web users to specific sites, but also by
sorting the pre-qualified visitors using keyword association and search
history to recognize users’ interests. Google ensures that the users who
are directed to a partner site are more likely to purchase a product
there.[^56]

***Internal Analysis***

![](media/image10.png){width="6.0in" height="4.726388888888889in"}[^57]

As you can see Google’s Revenue has increased over the past three years.
An increase in revenue has lead to a constant increase in Net Income.
Since we are focusing on the Search Engine side of Google, with their
revenue coming from advertisements, they reported advertising revenues
of \$59,065,000,000 in 2014 and \$50,547,000,000 in 2013. Their revenues
from Google Network Members’ websites include revenues generated
primarily through advertising programs including: AdSense for search,
AdSense for content, AdExchange, AdMob, and DoubleClick Bid Manager. In
this multi-device world, Google generates their advertising revenues
increasingly from mobile phones and newer advertising formats, and the
margins from the advertising revenues from these sources have generally
been lower than those from desktop computers and tablets.[^58]

![](media/image09.png){width="6.0in" height="5.895138888888889in"}[^59]

![](media/image11.png){width="6.0in" height="6.375in"}

***SWOT Analysis***

Google Inc. is an American multinational technology company specializing
in Internet-related services and products having successfully captured
the search engine market. The company has proved to have many different
strengths due to their successful. First off, Google’s Search Engine is
the most dominate search engine in the world, processing over 40,000
search queries every second on average. This translates to over 3.5
billion searches per day and 1.2 trillion searches per year worldwide.
Google Search leads this market for being asked 65.4% of questions.
Yahoo! Search comes in second with 15.3% queries, followed by Microsoft
Bing at 10.7%.[^60]

Google’s Search feature is something that everyone can use because it is
so simple and straightforward. One search can lead to a million
different answers but Google can help one find exactly what they are
looking for. The Google brand recognition is so powerful that the term
“to Google” is even in the Dictionary. Everyone around the world knows
what Google is and what they do. When people need an answer to a
question, the first thing they think of is “to Google it” because they
know that whatever they are looking for will be just a few clicks
away.[^61]

Google also has a strong organizational culture that is focused on
innovation, while providing quality of life to its employees. On their
company website, Google proudly displays videos of its offices and
employees at work. Each employee is encouraged to pursue innovative
ideas about his or her passions. This is demonstrated, for example,
through the spare time allotted to software engineers who are allowed to
spend 2 hours per day on their own projects of choice. Google believes
that fostering employee creativity and a casual environment that
provides a quality of life is the best way to attract and maintain
quality employees. This policy has been successful as employment at
Google is highly selective and desirable.

Consequently, the Google organizational culture effectively translates
into its innovative products. Google has been ranked No.1 in Fortune's
latest annual list of “100 Best Companies to Work For.” The search
engine giant employs 18,500 people in the United States alone and is the
most sought after employer in the world. Google has an innovative and
creative culture where they promote employee well being and imagination.
This company is great to work for having very low employee turnover
rates by offering high salaries and good benefits to staff that will
raise the company’s productivity.[^62]

The company extended its locations abroad to locations such as Canada,
Mexico, United Kingdom, South Korea, Taiwan, Puerto Rico, and
Australia.  Its expansion has increased the numbers of members and this
directly connected to the increase of profit. Google offers high quality
products and services at low prices and they don’t sell many products.
These factors lead to consumer loyalty in the long run. Google also has
a strong financial performance which helps the company maintain its
stand in the market and build the shareholders’ confidence.[^63]

Google has a broad range of services such as online advertising, online
display ads, and mobile advertising. It also offers various platforms
and applications including: Google Apps, Google Buzz, Google Book
Search, Google Checkout, Google News, Google Chrome, Google Play, Google
TV, and Google Wave. The company’s future business initiatives include
Google Editions and Google Android Market. The product portfolio of the
company also include: Gmail, Web Search, Toolbar, Custom Search Engines,
Maps, YouTube, Google Image Search, Google Scholar, Google Base, Google
Finance, Search Google Co-op, Custom Search, Google Video, Google Docs,
Google Spreadsheets, Google Slides, Google Calendar, Google Desktop,
Google Pack, Google Earth, Google Sketchup and Sketchup Pro, Google
Mobile, Google Labs, Google AdWords, Google AdSense, and Android. The
pro of having all these products is that they are completely integrated
with each other and work well combined together.[^64]

Google is the largest and most favored search engine. It is difficult to
locate it’s weaknesses compared to their competitors because it is the
most extensive search engine available on the Web. Google’s capabilities
are constantly evolving to accommodate the needs of users. Google’s
existence completely relies on the internet.

There is also a lack of advertisement can be a barrier for the company
to attract more customers. Google does little in the advertising
department because they are such a well known brand that they don’t need
advertisement, however they should keep their name relevant.

Google has been involved in many patent and litigation disputes with
other companies over the years that have tarnished their reputation.
Google has also been experiencing failing ad rates. In recent years,
especially 2013, the company has been faced with declining revenues from
ads and as a result, the profitability of the company has taken a hit.
Also, many spammers manipulate Google's ranking technology by creating
dummy sites with thousands of links to pages that they wanted Google to
rank highly.

Even though Google is so successful they could still be open to more
opportunities. Google’s social networking could use many improvements.
Google + reportedly beat out Twitter with 359 million users but is still
far behind Facebooks 701 million users. Social networking is a hard
market to enter into, therefore Google + is still struggling to gain
attention and users. Google + is not taken seriously as a social
networking site because Facebook is still the one to beat.[^65]

The smartphone market in the U.S. isn't saturated yet and millions still
need smartphones, many of which will come with Android's OS. Many people
are against Apple products which leaves a whole market open for Google
smartphones. Currently, Google has Android and Nexus smartphones but are
not saturating the market how they should be.

Also, Google Ventures is a relatively new capital venture group within
Google. Their main focus is investments in companies that are developing
new and potentially world-changing technologies. At present, Google
Ventures only considers investing in start-up firms within North
America. Google has already launched a few new models of notebooks,
tablets, and smartphones into the market but these were only
introduction models. Google could strengthen its entry into the
electronic device industry by introducing more products for more
customer groups and cut out its market share. This would result in
tighter integration of its software products and diversified income.
Google acquisitions and mergers are highly important to the company.
Google purchased Motorola in 2011, allowing the company to generate
revenue from the sale of hardware and services in both the mobile and
home segments. Google’s new products include: Google Glasses, electronic
cars, tablets, and Google TV. Google is such a powerfully well known
brand that is completely in control of the market but they still have
many opportunities. [^66]

Google is an important company, however that doesn’t deter them from
having many threats. Because the company offers a wide range of products
and services, it has a lot of competitors such as retail supermarkets,
wholesale stores, gas station, insurance companies, and so on. Since
this monopolistic competition can attract potential competitors easily,
the company can have hard time by dealing with this issue. Google is
involved in numerous markets that are highly competitive. Competition
could intensify with the entry of new competitors, development of new
technologies, products and services, and convergence. The company
witnesses competition from general purpose search engines including
Yahoo and Microsoft’s Bing as well as social networks such as Facebook
and Twitter. Google also faces many threats in regards to security and
privacy issues. This has been a problem for Google who has been
struggling to strengthen security measures to prevent outside parties
from breaching the company. Google has a lot of important and fragile
customer information that would cause a lot of problems if it was
breached.[^67]

***Strategies***

“There are many different ways you can use our services – to search for
and share information, to communicate with other people or to create new
content. When you share information with us, for example by creating a
Google Account, we can make those services even better – to show you
more relevant search results and ads, to help you connect with people or
to make sharing with others quicker and easier. As you use our services,
we want you to be clear how we’re using information and the ways in
which you can protect your privacy.”[^68]

Above is the opening statement from Google’s Privacy Policy regarding
the utilization of private information collected from its users. If a
user adheres to the policy, Google maintains the right to collect a wide
range of data from the various service-platforms it offers. The truth of
the matter is that all users of the Internet have different privacy
concerns. Therefore, in Google’s opening statement, the firm tries to
reassure the end-user by stating that all private information will be
used to enhance their overall Google experience. Private information can
be defined as any number or letter that spells out or represents any
demographic detail of a person. Moreover, Google treats its end-users
private data with much care, although it’s not Google who the people are
afraid of. The people are ultimately in fear of the government tapping
into our private lives. Therefore, it is critical that Google implements
new strategies to prevent government infiltration, while introducing new
ways of making its practices using private data increasingly transparent
to end-users.[^69]

When implementing a business-level or Corporate-level strategy, no
matter what, it is important to build off of the firm’s
core-competencies. The core-competencies that are found within Google
Inc. are software engineering, content indexing, maintaining scalable
hardware infrastructure, and the company’s culture of innovation should
be considered too. These principles followed by Google have allowed them
to create a solid line of core products, which include, PageRank,
Indexing Technology, Google Ads, and the Google mapping platform. The
resources demanded from these products require private information from
end-users that exposes their geographic and demographic data.[^70]

A quality that is working largely with, but also against Google, is the
fact of how “geeky” they are. The algorithms and different engineering
techniques that it takes for Google to exist seems to make it hard for
them to articulate how the end-user’s information is being used,
captured, and stored. The first suggestion would to be to utilize the
“Google Privacy” channel on YouTube more efficiently. Currently, the
Google controlled channel has only 40,000 subscribers and posts only an
average of two times a year.[^71] The channel isn’t doing a very good
job of making end-users conscious of its privacy practices. The firm
could do a better job of making end-users aware of their practices by
introducing an interactive video every quarter demonstrating exactly
what they take from you and how they will utilize it to produce an
improved overall experience. Users should be forced to watch the video
as they are forced to watch an ad.

Another way of providing transparency within their privacy practices
would be by utilizing their software-engineering abilities. In order to
truly provide a solution toward these privacy concerns, Google first
needs to know what the end-users’ main concerns are regarding personal
information. In order to gain a better understanding of what is
concerning these users, it would be appropriate to incorporate a
semiannually poll that all registered users must participate within.
This will provide a channel of communication between the end-users and
Google, allowing them to focus in on the issues of privacy. Google and
firms alike cannot only assume what its users are thinking – they must
give their users a voice. It is important that Google has the ability to
receive feedback, which will ultimately help sustain the firm in such an
evolving environment.

The final suggestion of implementation this analysis encourages the most
will offer is the option of “Google blackout.” Blackout searching is a
quick accessible feature on Google.com that offers registered and
unregistered users the option of completely anonymous web searching. The
blackout feature will prevent data from being collected through its
end-users on all of Google’s platforms. Google has brand equity large
enough to afford the backfire from this implementation. If users choose
the option to use Google Blackout, they may not notice any differences,
but some users will notice a big difference from within their search
results. The people who notice a difference are experiencing this
because by being completely anonymous, Google loses the ability to
identify you. If Google looses the ability to identify you, the user
will experience search results on a broader level than what they are
used to. Therefore, this will either allow the end-user to understand
the importance of Google’s privacy practices by experiencing the
significant changes in search results, or it will simply give the people
what they want, anonymity. The means of implementation of this strategy
largely depends on their software engineering team. The team would have
to develop a separate platform that is accessible within Google.com.
This platform would be engineered almost identically to its originator,
although it wouldn’t include the various methods of personalization used
to improve search results. The idea behind all of this is to help
end-users realize the value of the firm’s privacy practices through
helping them realize that sharing their private information is worth
having the most effective Google experience.

***Works Cited***

[*https://www.google.com/about/company/history/*](https://www.google.com/about/company/history/)

[*http://www.landley.net/history/mirror/net/google-history.html*](http://www.landley.net/history/mirror/net/google-history.html)

[*https://www.google.com/about/company/history/*](https://www.google.com/about/company/history/)

[*http://www.landley.net/history/mirror/net/google-history.html*](http://www.landley.net/history/mirror/net/google-history.html)

[*http://www.businessinsider.com/history-sergey-brin-larry-page-and-google-strategy-2011-3*](http://www.businessinsider.com/history-sergey-brin-larry-page-and-google-strategy-2011-3)

Google.com

[*https://www.google.com/about/company/history/*](https://www.google.com/about/company/history/)

[*https://www.google.com/about/company/history/*](https://www.google.com/about/company/history/)

[*https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OAyUNI3\_V2c&feature=youtu.be*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OAyUNI3_V2c&feature=youtu.be)

[*www.youtube.com/watch?v=OAyUNI3\_V2c&feature=youtube*](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OAyUNI3_V2c&feature=youtube)

[*https://www.google.com/maps/@42.3414189,-71.2457625,15z*](https://www.google.com/maps/@42.3414189,-71.2457625,15z)

[*http://www.landley.net/history/mirror/net/google-history.html*](http://www.landley.net/history/mirror/net/google-history.html)

[*https://www.google.com/about/company/*](https://www.google.com/about/company/)

[*http://bi.galegroup.com/essentials/article/GALE%7CI2501312700/c0bf76ecd0964520149cc15cf1a59771?u=las*](http://bi.galegroup.com/essentials/article/GALE%7CI2501312700/c0bf76ecd0964520149cc15cf1a59771?u=las)

[*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usenet*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usenet)

[*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google\_Groups*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Groups)

[*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dodgeball\_(service)*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dodgeball_(service))

[*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dodgeball\_(service)*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dodgeball_(service))

[*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google\_Latitude*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Latitude)

[*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web\_application*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_application)

[*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YouTube\_Next\_Lab\_and\_Audience\_Development\_Group*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YouTube_Next_Lab_and_Audience_Development_Group)

Hitt/Ireland/Hoskisson. (2015). Strategic Management Cases. Mason, OH:
Cengage Learning. p. 31 -42

[*https://www.siteground.com/tutorials/googleapps/*](https://www.siteground.com/tutorials/googleapps/)

[*http://searchsoa.techtarget.com/definition/Gmail*](http://searchsoa.techtarget.com/definition/Gmail)

[*https://www.siteground.com/tutorials/googleapps/googleapps\_overview.htm*](https://www.siteground.com/tutorials/googleapps/googleapps_overview.htm)

[*https://www.siteground.com/tutorials/googleapps/googleapps\_overview.htm*](https://www.siteground.com/tutorials/googleapps/googleapps_overview.htm)

[*https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/overview*](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/overview)

[*https://apps.google.com/marketplace/?pann=gam*](https://apps.google.com/marketplace/?pann=gam)

[*http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A\_Case\_Study\_of\_Google\_Inc*](http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A_Case_Study_of_Google_Inc)

[*http://benmorrow.info/blog/external-analysis-of-google-inc*](http://benmorrow.info/blog/external-analysis-of-google-inc)

[*http://benmorrow.info/blog/external-analysis-of-google-inc*](http://benmorrow.info/blog/external-analysis-of-google-inc)

[*http://www.eruptingmind.com/the-business-environment-and-its-effects-on-google/*](http://www.eruptingmind.com/the-business-environment-and-its-effects-on-google/)

[*http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A\_Case\_Study\_of\_Google\_Inc*](http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A_Case_Study_of_Google_Inc)

[*http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A\_Case\_Study\_of\_Google\_Inc*](http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A_Case_Study_of_Google_Inc)

[*http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A\_Case\_Study\_of\_Google\_Inc*](http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A_Case_Study_of_Google_Inc)

[*http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A\_Case\_Study\_of\_Google\_Inc*](http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A_Case_Study_of_Google_Inc)

[*http://benmorrow.info/blog/external-analysis-of-google-inc*](http://benmorrow.info/blog/external-analysis-of-google-inc)

[*http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A\_Case\_Study\_of\_Google\_Inc*](http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A_Case_Study_of_Google_Inc)

[*http://panmore.com/google-pestel-pestle-analysis-recommendations*](http://panmore.com/google-pestel-pestle-analysis-recommendations)

[*http://benmorrow.info/blog/external-analysis-of-google-inc*](http://benmorrow.info/blog/external-analysis-of-google-inc)

[*http://www.technology-essays.com/essays/bells\_post\_industrial\_society\_essay.htm*](http://www.technology-essays.com/essays/bells_post_industrial_society_essay.htm)

[*http://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/071515/search-engines-compete-google.asp\#ixzz3qkU3R0Em*](http://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/071515/search-engines-compete-google.asp#ixzz3qkU3R0Em)

[*www.alexa.com*](http://www.alexa.com)

[*http://fortune.com/2014/11/17/top-10-research-development/*](http://fortune.com/2014/11/17/top-10-research-development/)

[*http://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/071515/search-engines-compete-google.asp*](http://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/071515/search-engines-compete-google.asp)

[*http://finance.yahoo.com/q/co?s=GOOG+Competitors*](http://finance.yahoo.com/q/co?s=GOOG+Competitors)

[*https://www.netmarketshare.com/search-engine-market-share.aspx?qprid=4&qpcustomd=0*](https://www.netmarketshare.com/search-engine-market-share.aspx?qprid=4&qpcustomd=0)

[*http://www.microsoft.com/investor/reports/ar14/index.html*](http://www.microsoft.com/investor/reports/ar14/index.html)

[*http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/YHOO/967709701x0x826745/b7e0b2eb-68d3-4612-9307-03478b206a37/YahooInc2014AnnualReport.pdf*](http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/YHOO/967709701x0x826745/b7e0b2eb-68d3-4612-9307-03478b206a37/YahooInc2014AnnualReport.pdf)

[*https://investor.google.com/financial/tables.html*](https://investor.google.com/financial/tables.html)

[*http://benmorrow.info/blog/internal-analysis-of-google-inc*](http://benmorrow.info/blog/internal-analysis-of-google-inc)

[*http://finance.yahoo.com/q/is?s=GOOG+Income+Statement&annual*](http://finance.yahoo.com/q/is?s=GOOG+Income+Statement&annual)

[*https://investor.google.com/pdf/20141231\_google\_10K.pdf*](https://investor.google.com/pdf/20141231_google_10K.pdf)

[*http://finance.yahoo.com/q/bs?s=GOOG+Balance+Sheet&annual*](http://finance.yahoo.com/q/bs?s=GOOG+Balance+Sheet&annual)

[*https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KgGXuHUW4CE*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KgGXuHUW4CE)

[*http://www.ukessays.com/essays/business/analysing-the-core-competencies-of-google-inc-business-essay.php\#ixzz3qpdYFnxK*](http://www.ukessays.com/essays/business/analysing-the-core-competencies-of-google-inc-business-essay.php#ixzz3qpdYFnxK)

[*https://www.youtube.com/user/googleprivacy/about*](https://www.youtube.com/user/googleprivacy/about)

[*https://stonybrook.digication.com/calvins\_google/Welcome*](https://stonybrook.digication.com/calvins_google/Welcome)\
[*http://www.ukessays.com/essays/information-technology/the-strength-weakness-opportunities-and-
threats-analysis-information-technology-essay.php*](http://www.ukessays.com/essays/information-technology/the-strength-weakness-opportunities-and-%09threats-analysis-information-technology-essay.php)\
[*http://go.galegroup.com/ps/retrieve.do?sort=RELEVANCE&docType=Company+overview&tabID=T003p
rodId=GVRL&searchId=R2&resultListType=RESULT\_LIST&searchType=AdvancedSearchForm&co
ntentSegment=&currentPosition=1&searchResultsType=MultiTab&inPS=true&userGroupName=
las&docId=GALE%7CCX2979600110&contentSet=GALE%7CCX2979600110*](http://go.galegroup.com/ps/retrieve.do?sort=RELEVANCE&docType=Company+overview&tabID=T003p%09rodId=GVRL&searchId=R2&resultListType=RESULT_LIST&searchType=AdvancedSearchForm&co%09ntentSegment=&currentPosition=1&searchResultsType=MultiTab&inPS=true&userGroupName=%09las&docId=GALE%7CCX2979600110&contentSet=GALE%7CCX2979600110)

[^1]: [*https://www.google.com/about/company/history/*](https://www.google.com/about/company/history/)

[^2]: [*http://www.landley.net/history/mirror/net/google-history.html*](http://www.landley.net/history/mirror/net/google-history.html)

[^3]: [*https://www.google.com/about/company/history/*](https://www.google.com/about/company/history/)

[^4]: [*http://www.landley.net/history/mirror/net/google-history.html*](http://www.landley.net/history/mirror/net/google-history.html)

[^5]: [*http://www.businessinsider.com/history-sergey-brin-larry-page-and-google-strategy-2011-3*](http://www.businessinsider.com/history-sergey-brin-larry-page-and-google-strategy-2011-3)

[^6]: Google.com

[^7]: [*https://www.google.com/about/company/history/*](https://www.google.com/about/company/history/)

[^8]: [*https://www.google.com/about/company/history/*](https://www.google.com/about/company/history/)

[^9]: [*https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OAyUNI3\_V2c&feature=youtu.be*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OAyUNI3_V2c&feature=youtu.be)

[^10]: [*www.youtube.com/watch?v=OAyUNI3\_V2c&feature=youtube*](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OAyUNI3_V2c&feature=youtube)

[^11]: [*https://www.google.com/maps/@42.3414189,-71.2457625,15z*](https://www.google.com/maps/@42.3414189,-71.2457625,15z)

[^12]: [*http://www.landley.net/history/mirror/net/google-history.html*](http://www.landley.net/history/mirror/net/google-history.html)

[^13]: [*https://www.google.com/about/company/*](https://www.google.com/about/company/)

[^14]: [*http://bi.galegroup.com/essentials/article/GALE%7CI2501312700/c0bf76ecd0964520149cc15cf1a59771?u=las*](http://bi.galegroup.com/essentials/article/GALE%7CI2501312700/c0bf76ecd0964520149cc15cf1a59771?u=las)

[^15]: [*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usenet*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usenet)

[^16]: [*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google\_Groups*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Groups)

[^17]: [*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dodgeball\_(service)*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dodgeball_(service))

[^18]: [*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dodgeball\_(service)*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dodgeball_(service))

[^19]: [*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google\_Latitude*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Latitude)

[^20]: [*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web\_application*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_application)

[^21]: [*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YouTube\_Next\_Lab\_and\_Audience\_Development\_Group*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YouTube_Next_Lab_and_Audience_Development_Group)

[^22]: Hitt/Ireland/Hoskisson. (2015). Strategic Management Cases.
    Mason, OH: Cengage Learning. p. 31

[^23]: Hitt/Ireland/Hoskisson. (2015). Strategic Management Cases.
    Mason, OH: Cengage Learning. p. 32

[^24]: [*https://www.siteground.com/tutorials/googleapps/*](https://www.siteground.com/tutorials/googleapps/)

[^25]: [*http://searchsoa.techtarget.com/definition/Gmail*](http://searchsoa.techtarget.com/definition/Gmail)

[^26]: [*https://www.siteground.com/tutorials/googleapps/googleapps\_overview.htm*](https://www.siteground.com/tutorials/googleapps/googleapps_overview.htm)

[^27]: Hitt/Ireland/Hoskisson. (2015). Strategic Management Cases.
    Mason, OH: Cengage Learning. p. 32

[^28]: [*https://www.siteground.com/tutorials/googleapps/googleapps\_overview.htm*](https://www.siteground.com/tutorials/googleapps/googleapps_overview.htm)

[^29]: [*https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/overview*](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/overview)

[^30]: [*https://apps.google.com/marketplace/?pann=gam*](https://apps.google.com/marketplace/?pann=gam)

[^31]: [*http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A\_Case\_Study\_of\_Google\_Inc*](http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A_Case_Study_of_Google_Inc)

[^32]: Hitt/Ireland/Hoskisson. (2015). Strategic Management Cases.
    Mason, OH: Cengage Learning. p. 40

[^33]: [*http://benmorrow.info/blog/external-analysis-of-google-inc*](http://benmorrow.info/blog/external-analysis-of-google-inc)

[^34]: [*http://benmorrow.info/blog/external-analysis-of-google-inc*](http://benmorrow.info/blog/external-analysis-of-google-inc)

[^35]: [*http://www.eruptingmind.com/the-business-environment-and-its-effects-on-google/*](http://www.eruptingmind.com/the-business-environment-and-its-effects-on-google/)

[^36]: [*http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A\_Case\_Study\_of\_Google\_Inc*](http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A_Case_Study_of_Google_Inc)

[^37]: [*http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A\_Case\_Study\_of\_Google\_Inc*](http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A_Case_Study_of_Google_Inc)

[^38]: [*http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A\_Case\_Study\_of\_Google\_Inc*](http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A_Case_Study_of_Google_Inc)

[^39]: [*http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A\_Case\_Study\_of\_Google\_Inc*](http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A_Case_Study_of_Google_Inc)

[^40]: [*http://benmorrow.info/blog/external-analysis-of-google-inc*](http://benmorrow.info/blog/external-analysis-of-google-inc)

[^41]: [*http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A\_Case\_Study\_of\_Google\_Inc*](http://www.academia.edu/5356952/A_Case_Study_of_Google_Inc)

[^42]: [*http://panmore.com/google-pestel-pestle-analysis-recommendations*](http://panmore.com/google-pestel-pestle-analysis-recommendations)

[^43]: [*http://benmorrow.info/blog/external-analysis-of-google-inc*](http://benmorrow.info/blog/external-analysis-of-google-inc)

[^44]: Hitt/Ireland/Hoskisson. (2015). Strategic Management Cases.
    Mason, OH: Cengage Learning

[^45]: [*http://www.technology-essays.com/essays/bells\_post\_industrial\_society\_essay.htm*](http://www.technology-essays.com/essays/bells_post_industrial_society_essay.htm)

[^46]: [*http://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/071515/search-engines-compete-google.asp\#ixzz3qkU3R0Em*](http://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/071515/search-engines-compete-google.asp#ixzz3qkU3R0Em)

[^47]: [*www.alexa.com*](http://www.alexa.com)

[^48]: Hitt/Ireland/Hoskisson. (2015). Strategic Management Cases.
    Mason, OH: Cengage Learning

[^49]: [*http://fortune.com/2014/11/17/top-10-research-development/*](http://fortune.com/2014/11/17/top-10-research-development/)

[^50]: [*http://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/071515/search-engines-compete-google.asp*](http://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/071515/search-engines-compete-google.asp)

[^51]: [*http://finance.yahoo.com/q/co?s=GOOG+Competitors*](http://finance.yahoo.com/q/co?s=GOOG+Competitors)

[^52]: [*https://www.netmarketshare.com/search-engine-market-share.aspx?qprid=4&qpcustomd=0*](https://www.netmarketshare.com/search-engine-market-share.aspx?qprid=4&qpcustomd=0)

[^53]: [*http://www.microsoft.com/investor/reports/ar14/index.html*](http://www.microsoft.com/investor/reports/ar14/index.html)

[^54]: [*http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/YHOO/967709701x0x826745/b7e0b2eb-68d3-4612-9307-03478b206a37/YahooInc2014AnnualReport.pdf*](http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/YHOO/967709701x0x826745/b7e0b2eb-68d3-4612-9307-03478b206a37/YahooInc2014AnnualReport.pdf)

[^55]: [*https://investor.google.com/financial/tables.html*](https://investor.google.com/financial/tables.html)

[^56]: [*http://benmorrow.info/blog/internal-analysis-of-google-inc*](http://benmorrow.info/blog/internal-analysis-of-google-inc)

[^57]: [*http://finance.yahoo.com/q/is?s=GOOG+Income+Statement&annual*](http://finance.yahoo.com/q/is?s=GOOG+Income+Statement&annual)

[^58]: [*https://investor.google.com/pdf/20141231\_google\_10K.pdf*](https://investor.google.com/pdf/20141231_google_10K.pdf)

[^59]: [*http://finance.yahoo.com/q/bs?s=GOOG+Balance+Sheet&annual*](http://finance.yahoo.com/q/bs?s=GOOG+Balance+Sheet&annual)

[^60]: [*http://go.galegroup.com/ps/retrieve.do?sort=RELEVANCE&docType=Company+overview&tabID=T003&prodId=GVRL&searchId=R2&resultListType=RESULT\_LIST&searchType=AdvancedSearchForm&contentSegment=&currentPosition=1&searchResultsType=MultiTab&inPS=true&userGroupName=las&docId=GALE%7CCX2979600110&contentSet=GALE%7CCX2979600110&authCount=1&u=las*](http://go.galegroup.com/ps/retrieve.do?sort=RELEVANCE&docType=Company+overview&tabID=T003&prodId=GVRL&searchId=R2&resultListType=RESULT_LIST&searchType=AdvancedSearchForm&contentSegment=&currentPosition=1&searchResultsType=MultiTab&inPS=true&userGroupName=las&docId=GALE%7CCX2979600110&contentSet=GALE%7CCX2979600110&authCount=1&u=las)

[^61]: [*http://www.ukessays.com/essays/information-technology/the-strength-weakness-opportunities-and-threats-analysis-information-technology-essay.php*](http://www.ukessays.com/essays/information-technology/the-strength-weakness-opportunities-and-threats-analysis-information-technology-essay.php)

[^62]: [*https://stonybrook.digication.com/calvins\_google/Welcome*](https://stonybrook.digication.com/calvins_google/Welcome)

[^63]: [*http://go.galegroup.com/ps/retrieve.do?sort=RELEVANCE&docType=Company+overview&tabID=T003&prodId=GVRL&searchId=R2&resultListType=RESULT\_LIST&searchType=AdvancedSearchForm&contentSegment=&currentPosition=1&searchResultsType=MultiTab&inPS=true&userGroupName=las&docId=GALE%7CCX2979600110&contentSet=GALE%7CCX2979600110&authCount=1&u=las*](http://go.galegroup.com/ps/retrieve.do?sort=RELEVANCE&docType=Company+overview&tabID=T003&prodId=GVRL&searchId=R2&resultListType=RESULT_LIST&searchType=AdvancedSearchForm&contentSegment=&currentPosition=1&searchResultsType=MultiTab&inPS=true&userGroupName=las&docId=GALE%7CCX2979600110&contentSet=GALE%7CCX2979600110&authCount=1&u=las)

[^64]: [*http://www.ukessays.com/essays/information-technology/the-strength-weakness-opportunities-and-threats-analysis-information-technology-essay.php*](http://www.ukessays.com/essays/information-technology/the-strength-weakness-opportunities-and-threats-analysis-information-technology-essay.php)

[^65]: [*http://go.galegroup.com/ps/retrieve.do?sort=RELEVANCE&docType=Company+overview&tabID=T003&prodId=GVRL&searchId=R2&resultListType=RESULT\_LIST&searchType=AdvancedSearchForm&contentSegment=&currentPosition=1&searchResultsType=MultiTab&inPS=true&userGroupName=las&docId=GALE%7CCX2979600110&contentSet=GALE%7CCX2979600110&authCount=1&u=las*](http://go.galegroup.com/ps/retrieve.do?sort=RELEVANCE&docType=Company+overview&tabID=T003&prodId=GVRL&searchId=R2&resultListType=RESULT_LIST&searchType=AdvancedSearchForm&contentSegment=&currentPosition=1&searchResultsType=MultiTab&inPS=true&userGroupName=las&docId=GALE%7CCX2979600110&contentSet=GALE%7CCX2979600110&authCount=1&u=las)

[^66]: [*http://www.ukessays.com/essays/information-technology/the-strength-weakness-opportunities-and-threats-analysis-information-technology-essay.php*](http://www.ukessays.com/essays/information-technology/the-strength-weakness-opportunities-and-threats-analysis-information-technology-essay.php)

[^67]: [*http://go.galegroup.com/ps/retrieve.do?sort=RELEVANCE&docType=Company+overview&tabID=T003&prodId=GVRL&searchId=R2&resultListType=RESULT\_LIST&searchType=AdvancedSearchForm&contentSegment=&currentPosition=1&searchResultsType=MultiTab&inPS=true&userGroupName=las&docId=GALE%7CCX2979600110&contentSet=GALE%7CCX2979600110&authCount=1&u=las*](http://go.galegroup.com/ps/retrieve.do?sort=RELEVANCE&docType=Company+overview&tabID=T003&prodId=GVRL&searchId=R2&resultListType=RESULT_LIST&searchType=AdvancedSearchForm&contentSegment=&currentPosition=1&searchResultsType=MultiTab&inPS=true&userGroupName=las&docId=GALE%7CCX2979600110&contentSet=GALE%7CCX2979600110&authCount=1&u=las)

[^68]: [*https://www.google.com/policies/privacy/*](https://www.google.com/policies/privacy/)

[^69]: [*https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KgGXuHUW4CE*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KgGXuHUW4CE)

[^70]: [*http://www.ukessays.com/essays/business/analysing-the-core-competencies-of-google-inc-business-essay.php\#ixzz3qpdYFnxK*](http://www.ukessays.com/essays/business/analysing-the-core-competencies-of-google-inc-business-essay.php#ixzz3qpdYFnxK)

[^71]: [*https://www.youtube.com/user/googleprivacy/about*](https://www.youtube.com/user/googleprivacy/about)
